---
title: Laziness is motivating
description: >-
  Laziness is a motivator for making good tools.
  By optimizing in ways that allow developers to be lazy,
  you can make tools that are more desirable to use.
image: img/2014/larry.jpg
type: post
aliases:
 - /2014/laziness.html

---
> **Laziness:** The quality that makes you go to great effort to reduce overall
> energy expenditure. It makes you write labor-saving programs that other
> people will find useful and document what you wrote so you don't have to
> answer so many questions about it.
>
> Larry Wall, creator of Perl

Aside from rockin' an awesome 'stache, I have a good level of respect for
Perl's first author. The language he created is totally pragmatic and probably
holds the Internet together. (Aside: if you've ever looked at the Debian
installation process, you may have noticed that Perl is used at an incredibly
early stage and does some serious lifting. I think that's really cool.)

Larry's mindset about laziness motivates me to focus intently on the tool's
that I make. A good tool makes it look like everything is easy and you're being
lazy by using them. So, for command line tools, I have some rules of thumb:

1.  **The optional flags had better be optional.** Seriously. I've had to work
    on projects where the amount of flags passed into the tool rivaled
    the complexity of an airplane cockpit's dashboard. You won't win any
    friends by making a monster interface. If your tool is complex, you
    can manage it by following the convention in the industry of using
    sub-commands (e.g., git, svn, pip, apt-get).
2.  **Configuration files are your friends.** Users should have some choice
    about how to instruct your tool to do work. When the only option is
    parameters on the command line, you force them to recall old commands from
    their history or remember all the ordering and flag names that you built
    into your system. By providing configuration file support, users can
    capture their needs in a file instead of their wetware, and they'll have an
    easier time using your product.
3.  **Avoid jargon.** Many people in your own field probably despise some of
    the jargon that is used in professional communication. For the software
    world, I am such a person. I've met developers that love to use jargon.
    Maybe it makes them feel important and intelligent, but when what they say
    feels roughly like talking about a "complex for stationary automobiles"
    instead of a "parking garage," I can tell they are full of crap. If a
    user has to translate from your babble into something comprehensible by a
    "normal" human being, then you lose.
4.  **Provide good help.** Ideally, the help documentation for your tool
    should be as close as possible for a user to access (e.g., `foobar -h`,
    `foobar --help`, `foobar help`). If you don't keep the help docs close to
    the implementation, you run the risk of getting out of sync.
    Additionally, documentation should also be accessible from more than just
    the Internet. I work in an industry that frequently uses private networks
    that don't have direct access to the Internet. Without local docs, learning
    about a product can become a harder task. Lower the barrier of entry for
    your users whenever possible.

If you factor in some of these tips, you'll let your users be truly lazy. Your
tool will be easier to understand, there will be less for them to remember, and
getting the right information would be simple. With an easier tool, users can
be lazy and focus on more important things, like *grooming an amazing
mustache*.
