---
title: A complete guide to i18n in Python
description: >-
  The world speaks far more than English.
  To broaden the reach of an application,
  developers should internationalize the text
  to other languages
  to reach a bigger audience.
  This is a complete detailed guide
  to explain how to internationalize Python code.
image: img/2015/translation.png
type: post
aliases:
 - /2015/i18n.html

---
This is a start to finish guide showing how to do internationalization (i18n)
for a Python application. When I added i18n to {{< extlink "http://handroll.github.io/" "handroll" >}},
I struggled to
find clear advice for supporting other languages. This is one opinionated
view explaining how I got there.

Table of Contents:

* [Marking strings](#marking)
* [Extracting the master list](#extracting)
* [Getting translations for other languages](#pot2po)
* [Packaging it together](#packaging)
* [Testing out the package](#testing)
* [Questions?](#questions)

## Overview

To internationalize code, you have to treat user text strings in a certain
way. All text strings must be wrapped with a special function call. This
special function marks the strings as something that needs translation.
Once all the strings are marked, i18n tools can scan your code to make
a master list of everything. With the master list available, translators
can produce a list of translated strings for each desired language. The
translated strings are added back to the Python code and it's all
bundled up into a nice translated final product. Then you may want
to [test that out](/2013/test-your-packaging.html).

That's a lot of stuff, but I'll explain each part of that process in detail.
For the purposes of this guide, all of my example code will refer to the
`handroll` package. If this is your Python code, replace `handroll` with
the name of your top level Python package.

<a id='marking'></a>
## Marking strings

The special function that I mentioned in the overview looks like
`_('Hello World')`. This function comes from the `gettext` module.
Python uses GNU gettext to do translation so let's look at the handroll
code that creates the `_` function in `handroll/i18n.py`.

```python
import gettext
import os

localedir = os.path.join(os.path.abspath(os.path.dirname(__file__)), 'locale')
translate = gettext.translation('handroll', localedir, fallback=True)
_ = translate.gettext
```

This little chunk of code makes a translation object using a `locale`
directory as the source of translated strings. Your `locale` directory
doesn't exist yet, but it is where your application will look for
translations at run time. From the translation object, I made an `_`
alias for `translate.gettext`. This underscore is not particularly
special, however, it is the conventional name of this function that is
used by the Python community.

I hope there is enough here now to understand what will happen at run
time. The important idea is that `'Hello World'` acts like a key.
When the code executes, that "key" will be used to look in the locale
data to find a matching translation. The return value of `_` will
be the translated string or the original if the translation is
missing.

### `_` and `format` strings

One weirdness that you will quickly encounter if you use `format`
for your strings is where to close the `_` parentheses. Here is an
example to make it clear.

```python
_('Close the underscore function first. A {number}').format(number=42)
```

<a id='extracting'></a>
## Extracting the master list

With all strings marked with `_()`, it is time to extract them into
a master list. Gettext refers to this master list as the `Portable
Object Template` (`POT`) file. To generate the POT file, I turned
to a tool called {{< extlink "http://babel.pocoo.org/" "Babel" >}}. Babel is designed to help
developers handle i18n issues in a wide variety of ways. It's cool
with a lot of features, but for this guide, I'll focus on its
gettext support.

Babel extends a `setup.py` file with new commands. (Python packaging
is out of scope for this guide so if `setup.py` is completely foreign
to you, please check out {{< extlink "https://docs.python.org/2/distutils/introduction.html" "Distributing Python Modules" >}}
for more information.)

To generate a POT file, run `python setup.py extract_messages`. You
will need some settings similar to:

```ini
[extract_messages]
input_dirs = handroll
output_file = handroll/locale/handroll.pot
```

<a id='pot2po'></a>
## Getting translations for other languages

Now that you have generated a POT file, you are ready to get translated
versions of your strings. Remember that the *T* in POT is for *template*.
The translated files are called PO files, and translators use the POT file
as a starting point to generate their PO file. Doing translation by
manually creating the PO file is possible, but it is tedious.
At this point, I turned to a service called {{< extlink "https://www.transifex.com/" "Transifex" >}}.

Transifex is focused on making translation easy. It's free for
open source projects and really easy to use. I set up a project
for handroll, configured Transifex to "watch" the POT file for
changes, and translators can easily translate all the strings in
the project. Transifex has an API that enabled me to pull PO files
back into the repository whenever I needed. The script is a little
too long to put in this post, but you can {{< extlink "https://github.com/handroll/handroll/blob/master/transifex.py" "look at it on GitHub" >}}.

One important thing that the script does is store PO files in a
specific structure in the `locale` directory. Gettext expects an
order like `<language>/LC_MESSAGES/handroll.po`.

<a id='packaging'></a>
## Packaging it together

After the translated PO files are in place, it is time to package
your translation data. The setup process includes extra data in
`MANIFEST.in`. Add a line similar to the one below to ensure all
`locale` data is put into the package archive.

`recursive-include handroll/locale *`

So far I've lied a little bit for clarity in explanation. Gettext
does not use PO files directly for looking up translations. The
truth is that the PO file must be compiled into a binary Machine
Object (MO) file (for faster speed). Again, we can turn to Babel
for help. Babel has a `compile_catalog` command that can compile
PO into MO. You can run it with `python setup.py compile_catalog`.

It will need settings like:

```ini
[compile_catalog]
domain = handroll
directory = handroll/locale
```

Because translations will not work without MO files, I extended
`setup.py` so that the `sdist` command will always run
`compile_catalog`.

```python
from setuptools.command.sdist import sdist


class Sdist(sdist):
    """Custom ``sdist`` command to ensure that mo files are always created."""

    def run(self):
        self.run_command('compile_catalog')
        # sdist is an old style class so super cannot be used.
        sdist.run(self)
```

If you do this, don't forget to add `cmdclass={'sdist': Sdist}` and
`setup_requires=['Babel']` in your `setup` call.

At this point, running `python setup.py sdist` should create a
tarball with translations for your project. You're almost done!

<a id='testing'></a>
## Testing out the package

Testing translations is not easy. If you go the extra mile, you can
know that people from all different cultures can enjoy your software.
But translation testing is not easy because you need tests that run
every string in your code. For handroll, that meant I had to get to
100% test coverage to get those really strange corner cases.

The reason to test is that incorrectly translated strings can destroy
your code. If you have a format string like
`_('Hello {name}!').format(name='Johnny')` and a translator makes a
mistake like `'¡Hola {nombre}!'`, then that code would break for Spanish
users.

```pycon
>>> '¡Hola {nombre}!'.format(name='Johnny')
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
KeyError: 'nombre'
```

To test out these strings, you need two things: MO files and the
`LANGUAGE` environment variable. Let's assume you use the
{{< extlink "https://nose.readthedocs.org/en/latest/" "nose" >}} test runner.
To test out your Spanish support, you can run:

```console
$ LANGUAGE=es nosetests
..................................
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Ran 34 tests in 1.440s

OK
```

In whatever continuous integration system you use, run your unit
tests through each language you support to give yourself some
confidence that translations have not broken the software. The
{{< extlink "https://github.com/handroll/handroll/blob/master/tox.ini" "handroll tox.ini" >}} provides an example to compare against.
{{< extlink "https://tox.readthedocs.org/en/latest/" "Tox" >}} is awesome for this kind of stuff.

<a id='questions'></a>
## Questions?

In this guide, I did my best to document all that I did to
internationalize my project. I hope that all the concrete details
help you see how to translate your own project. If something is
missing or broken, let me know and I'll be glad to update the post.
