---
title: "Authz dilemmas"
description: >-
    Why is authorization so hard?
    It's hard from the start
    and doesn't get easier
    as a software system grows.
image: img/2022/brain.jpg
type: post
categories:
 - Software
tags:
 - brain dump
 - authz

---

Authorization.
The subject of answering "what is the user allowed to do?"

This is a hard problem in software systems.
I recently tried to solve authz issues
in my own side project,
and I've been thinking about this for work.

The problem is that authz is one
of those extra layers
that I think most people don't care about.
We want our software to be protected appropriately,
but I don't think we want to do the work.
When I'm writing a web app,
I want to solve a user's problem.
Nobody's problem is that they have to worry about who can access the data
on your site.
That problem doesn't exist until they start to use your service.

> A user is not interested in authorization.
The user is interested in solving a problem
and your software happens to solve it.

The problem of authorization only matters to a user *after* they sign up.
This means that they probably don't really care about authorization.
The likely assumption is that your authorization works.

For a new system,
you're better off delivering features
that solves the user's problem.
Using a burdensome authorization scheme takes away valuable time
that you could spend on fixing their problems.

So,
what should you do?

If you're trying to make your app survive,
you do what works
and is the minimal amount of effort possible.
After all,
if you're not solving a user's problem,
then who cares if you have some amazing authz system?
*Nobody*.

## Time to solve the problem

But now you've survived the primordial stage
of a web app.
You've got users,
but your authorization controls are a mess.
You've homegrown some stuff to check
that user A can't mess with user B's data.

With your success,
you begin to worry about your liability.
Maybe GDPR is a concern for your system
and you have to comply
because your site serves a European audience.

Whatever the reason,
the need for good authz controls always seems to grow.
In an instant,
the trust in your system can evaporate
if you have crappy controls in place
that allow people to take advantage
and steal data
from others.

With any luck,
a system reaches an amount of functionality
where you can service an audience
with the features
that you have,
and you can invest in the technology
that will ensure that customer data is safe.

Don't kid yourself into thinking that authz controls are a competitive moat.

> Even if you're successful, your users don't care about authorization.
They'll just expect it to work.

It's still desirable to invest as little effort as possible
while gaining adequate authz.

### Monolith FTW

If you've built a monolith
(which you should have at an early stage),
then your authz story is manageable.

From what I've learned,
*authz is all about relationships*.

The real question that I should have started with is:
what is the user allowed to do *with this data*?

That's a relationship question.
We're looking at the user's relationship to some kind of data
in your system.

The glorious part about a monolith is simple:
**all the data is already available to you**.

Relationships can be complex.
Answering what a user can do with a piece of data
might involve checking many other data models
in your system.

* A user might be able to access data
    because they are an owner of the data.
* A user might be able to access data
    because they are on a team that owns the data.
* A user might be able to access data
    because they were granted explicit permission
    for this individual piece of data.
* A user might be able to access data
    because the group they are a part of inherits permissions
    from some other group
    (i.e., their group is a superset of another group that owns the data).

The combinations are essentially endless.
Regardless of how complex the relationship is,
a monolith still has access to all of it.

Once you've outgrown your in-house solution,
you can reach for some kind of policy engine
that can represent the relationships
in your system.

{{< extlink "https://www.osohq.com/" "Oso" >}} is a pretty good example
that I've encountered recently
that can capture your system's relationships
to answer the question of "what can the user do?"

### SOA Woes

Did you build a service oriented architecture?
Well,
welcome to authz hard mode.

A policy engine works well when all the data is accessible,
but in a SOA,
all the data *isn't* accessible.
Authz in a distributed system has to deal
with networks.
That's a whole extra layer of complexity
for the authz problem.

If you can imagine an authz check involving five different data models,
then a SOA system might have those five different models
in five different services.
This could mean that doing an authorization check
requires five separate network calls.
Yikes.

Assume that all of five of these services have four 9s of uptime
(i.e., 99.99% uptime).
That means that your authz check is now three 9s of reliability
(99.99%^5 = 99.95%).

Is there another option?
Sure,
you could rely on a single authz service.

In this model,
the system pushes all authz checks
to a single service
to create an inverted index.
All the relationship definitions are centralized
to a single place,
and the services in the SOA are responsible
for pushing the details to the central service
(e.g., "user A can edit document Z").

Running the authz service yourself is possible
or you could use something like
{{< extlink "https://authzed.com/" "Authzed" >}}
and let them do it for you.

Why shell out some cash to a company?
Because the downside of a central authz service
is baked into the name:
the service is central.
In other words,
you've created a single point of failure
that your entire SOA architecture will depend on.
This service will have high availability requirements
if you want to have any hope
of maintaining reasonable uptime
on your system.

Whether you let individual services answer the authz checks
or push the authz problem to a central service,
you're going to deal with tradeoffs
related to uptime and operability.

## Conclusions?

I don't have any brilliant conclusion here.
This is the exactly the problem space
that I'm wrestling with both
for my personal SaaS
and for my professional life.

After doing research
and reading material
like the
{{< extlink "https://research.google/pubs/pub48190/" "Google Zanzibar white paper" >}},
I think a centralized service is the industrial strength solution.
It's high cost,
but massively scalable.

But does that make any sense
for my small project?
No way!

One of the aspects that I did like from Zanzibar is the idea
of treating like an inverted index.
The inverted index approach pushes a lot of the authz computation
to the writer.
Storage is used to set what a user is allowed to access.
This model makes it possible to answer everything
that a user is allowed to access
by doing a lookup on the precomputed permissions.

In a more policy oriented system,
that permission check is calculated
by the reader at runtime.
That lowers the storage requirements
at the cost of runtime computation.

Given how cheap storage is these days,
I think that would bias me towards authz technology
that uses this inverted index approach.
