---
title: "Goals for 2022"
description: >-
    These are my public notes
    about what I hope to tackle
    in 2022.
    I explore my thoughts and reasons
    for pursuing my particular goals.
image: img/2022/goals.jpg
type: post
categories:
 - Personal
tags:
 - Goals
 - Motivation
 - GettingThingsDone

---

Every year,
I set goals for myself
as a way to reflect
on the previous year
and project ahead
on what I hope to do.

In past years,
I've recorded these goals
using everything from Evernote
to pen and paper
to READMEs in a GitHub repository.
This year,
I've decided to post my goal
in a more publicly visible way
for a couple of reasons.

1. Accountability -
    If my goals are public,
    then it's harder for me for me to back out of doing them.
2. Openness -
    My online persona is fairly controlled.
    I write about Python and Django,
    but there is a lot more that I do in life.
    I hope that outlining my goals reveals a bit more
    of who I am.

Let's go!

## Writing

This will be the year that I finish my Understand Django series.
Rather than go out with a pitiful whimper
into nothingness,
I'm going to write three final articles.
The topics of these articles are based
on an informal poll that I ran on Twitter
and include:

* Performance
* Security
* Debugging

Once I finish the series,
I intend to transform the body of work
into an e-book
and self-publish it.

When I look at my writing goals for last year,
I missed my mark.
I wanted to have an article out every month.
With the combination
of only writing about Django
and a self imposed constraint
of writing three thousand word articles
as a target,
I didn't complete all the writing that I wanted.

This year,
I'm going to remove my 3k word constraint.
By doing so,
I'll try to write more often
or be willing to write on topics
that are a lot smaller in scope.
I still won't be shifting to listicles,
but I'll free myself to write more whimsical
and less structured articles.

## Media

With some of my time,
I stream on Twitch
and create a Django podcast.
My goal is to create an environment
that makes it easier
to create and produce.

In my current arrangement,
I have a lot of setup and teardown work.
That setup overhead work really eats
into my desire to create new things.
Because of a lack of desire,
my podcasting production suffered
for sure,
and I probably did fewer streams
than I might have otherwise.

At the end of the year,
I switched my streaming location
to the basement of my home.
This gives me a permanent place
to leave a configuration
so that I can jump right into media production.
Now that I've committed the space
to that,
I plan to get equipment
so that I can launch into things immediately.
My hope is that reducing content creation friction
will cause me to do more
and improve my content through practice and repetition.

I had aspiration of being something more
with my media production.
Now,
I'm less focused on the numbers and growth.
I want to make content
that helps people learn and grow,
but I'm not seeking an audience.
I'm done with spending tons of energy
on growth.
Instead,
I want to make content that *I'm* happy with.

## Software

I like to code for fun.
Hopefully this isn't a surprise
if you're reading this website.

My major coding side project is my homeschool application, School Desk,
that I built for my wife and other homeschooling families.
This app is the primary focus
of my Twitch stream.
My goal with School Desk is to continue building it
where it is useful and complete enough
to appeal to more families.

The app is currently in the red (by less than a dollar as of today),
but I would love to increase the customer pool enough
so that the app is sustainable
and I have some financial incentive to keep it going.
I would continue on it anyway
since my family is using it
and the service is valuable to us,
but being firmly in the black would be nice.

School Desk is my side project
that is grounded in reality.
I also want to explore more in software.
That is why I have a big audacious goal
of building a web framework in Lua.

Lua is a fascinating language to me.
The language is fast and versatile.
I also see that its community and tooling is small
and somewhat underdeveloped.
So, to explore,
I'm taking a road less traveled
and building what I can.
I'm working on a Lua web framework
that I hope will someday have characteristics
of Django.

I don't foresee this being a wildly successful project.
I'm doing it to bring some of my personal tastes
to an area to see what I can produce.

The fun part to me is that this is a gigantic project.
Lua doesn't have the same kind of WSGI/ASGI application interface
that Python has.
Because of that,
I'm also trying my hand at building a web server.
I've settled on `libuv`
and I think I want to adopt ASGI.
Essentially,
I will try to make `uvicorn` for Lua.

The beautiful part about this is that it doesn't have to be a success.
No one is asking for this,
and I don't have to fulfill anyone's expectations.
Maybe I'll create something useful
or maybe I'll just learn.
Either way,
I think the journey will be the fun part.

I'm considering streaming the journey,
but that's contingent on having it be trivial
to jump into a stream when I'm motivated to work on the project.

## Guitar

One of the things that brought me the most joy
in 2021
was my guitar.
I had zero experience playing an instrument prior to that year.
In fact,
I was in awe of people who could play an instrument
and sing.
My brain couldn't really process how it was possible
to do such complex activities
at the same time.

Fast forward to today
and I'm still in awe
of some of those musicians.
I have nothing but respect
for those who are capable
of playing very complex arrangements.
But,
I am no longer mystified
by the ability to play and sing
at the same time.
While I'm not fantastic by a long shot,
I practiced guitar for nearly an hour
for about 5 days per week last year.

Learning a brand new skill took me back
to that place
of joy and frustration
for not knowing how to do things.
And, over time,
I observed as my own skills developed.
Things that were impossible suddenly weren't anymore.

In 2022,
I want to continue that journey,
learn more chords,
gain some knowledge about music theory,
and become a more competent musician.

## Social

For my own sanity,
I had to make very deliberate choices
about my social life.

Once upon a time,
I was a huge gamer.
This still flairs up today
when I binge on a game
like Metroid Dread
and wonder how I just spent three hours straight
of playing a video game.
I have a dedicated game night where I play some online video games
with some local buddies.
This has been a great and casual way
for me to stay connected
with the lives of others
and helps ground me.

I'm also continuing to run my local Python meetup
in Frederick.
The group was on hiatus for a long time,
but I restarted it
in the second half
of last year.
I'm not in a huge tech city,
so having this outlet is an excellent way
to join up
with people who have some similar interests as me.

I also try to set goals
and be proactive
in my relationship
with my family.
My children are both under 10
and rapidly growing
into people with distinct personalities
and aspirations.
My goal is to have a dedicated time
with each of them
with the things that they are interested in
at least once a week.

My children have taught me how to seek the betterment
of others,
often at the expense of myself.
Children aren't the only way
to learn to empathize
and do things self-sacrificially,
but,
from my own experience,
I'm pretty sure we'd all be better people
and have a better functioning society
if we all had people in our lives
that we loved above ourselves.

## Language

I've slowed down significantly
with my Chinese and Russian study.
I spend time on Duolingo every day,
but many of the sessions are to practice words
that I've already learned.

I would love to complete the Chinese Duolingo cirriculum this year
and get through half of the Russian.

Learning new languages was quite fulfilling last year.
I'm not proficient enough in either Chinese or Russian
to carry on a conversation
with a native speaker,
but I've loved learning about the different ways
that people think and communicate.

## Health

Finally,
I have goals for my own personal health.
I regularly deal with a certain level
of chronic pain.
Through a combination
of lower back issues,
shoulder pains,
and wrist injuries,
I have to be very proactive
with exercise.

Weighlifting and yoga have helped me condition my body enough
so that my injuries are kept in check.
To that end,
I need to continue exercising at least a few times a week.

The other thing that I need to improve is my diet.
I have terrible willpower
when it comes to sweets.
I stay in reasonable shape
by intermittent fasting regularly,
but I should work to consume fewer sweets this year.

As a personal area of physical growth,
I'm going to continue exploring with my OneWheel.
I bought a OneWheel this year
because I thought it sounded interesting,
and I wanted to learn a new physical activity.
I didn't grow up doing any board sports
(I was more of a biker),
so riding a OneWheel has been great fun
and a great stress reliever.
