---
title: "Episode 10 - User Auth"
aliases:
 - /django-riffs/10
 - /djangoriffs/10
 - /django-riffs/10.
 - /djangoriffs/10.
description: >-
    On this episode,
    we're going to look
    at working with users
    in a Django project.
    We'll see Django's tools
    for identifying users
    and checking what those users are permitted
    to do
    on your website.
image: img/django-riffs-banner.png
type: post
categories:
 - Python
 - Django
tags:
 - Python
 - Django
 - auth

---

On this episode,
we're going to look
at working with users
in a Django project.
We'll see Django's tools
for identifying users
and checking what those users are permitted
to do
on your website.

Listen at {{< extlink "https://open.spotify.com/episode/5TGWbw0bpunquSIOb7h5Cg" "Spotify" >}}.

## Last Episode

On the last episode,
I explained the structure
of Django application.
We also talked why this structure is significant
and how Django apps benefit the Django ecosystem
as a tool for sharing code.

## Authentication And Authorization

*Authentication*:
When a user tries to prove
that they are who they say they are,
that is authentication.
A user will typically authenticate
with your site
via some login form
or using a social provider
like Google
to verify their identity.

> Authentication can only prove
that {{< extlink "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Important_Book" "you are you" >}}.

*Authorization*:
What is a user allowed to do?
Authorization answers that question.
We use authorization
to determine what permissions or groups a user belongs to,
so that we can scope what a user can do
on the site.

> Authorization determines what you can do.

## Setup

The auth features
in Django require a couple
of built-in Django applications
and a couple
of middleware classes.

The Django apps are:

* `django.contrib.auth` and
* `django.contrib.contenttypes` (which the `auth` app depends on)

The middleware classes are:

* `SessionMiddleware` to store data about a user in a session
* `AuthenticationMiddleware` to associate users with requests

The Django docs provide additional context
about these pre-requisites
so check out the
{{< extlink "https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/3.1/topics/auth/#installation" "auth topic installation section" >}}
for more details.

## Who Authenticates?

In the Django auth system,
identity is tracked
with a `User` model.
This model stores information
that you'd likely want
to associate
with anyone who uses your site.
The model includes:

* name fields,
* email address,
* datetime fields
    for when a user joins
    or logs in to your site,
* boolean fields
    for some coarse permissions
    that are very commonly needed,
* and password data.

## Authenticating With Passwords

When a user wants to authenticate,
the user must log in
to the site.
Django includes a `LoginView` class-based view
that can handle the appropriate steps.
The `LoginView` is a form view that:

* Collects the `username` and `password`
    from the user
* Calls the `django.contrib.auth.authenticate` function
    with the `username` and `password`
    to confirm that the user is who they claim to be
* Redirects to either a path that is set
    as the value of the `next` parameter
    in the URL's querystring
    or `settings.LOGIN_REDIRECT_URL`
    if the `next` parameter isn't set
* Or, if authentication failed,
    re-renders the form page
    with appropriate error messages

The `authenticate` function will loop through any auth backends
that are set
in the `AUTHENTICATION_BACKENDS` list setting.
Each backend can do one of three things:

* Authenticate correctly with the user and return a `User` instance.
* Not authenticate and return `None`.
    In this case, the next backend is tried.
* Not authenticate and raise a `PermissionDenied` exception.
    In this case, no other backends are tried.

The `ModelBackend` is named as it is
because it uses the `User` model
to authenticate.
Given a `username` and `password`
from the user,
the backend compares the provided data
to any existing `User` records.

Django doesn't store actual passwords.
To do so would be a major weakness
in the framework
because any leak
of the database would leak all users passwords.
And that's totally not cool.
Instead,
the `password` field
on the `User` model
stores a *hash*
of the password.

Why is this useful?
By computing hashes,
Django can safely store
that computed value
without compromising a user's password.
When a user wants to authenticate
with a site,
the user submits a password,
Django computes the hash
on that submitted value
and *compares it to the hash stored
in the database.*
If the hashes match,
then the site can conclude
that the user sent the correct password.
Only the password's hash
would match the hash stored
in the `User` model.

Hashing is a fascinating subject.
If you want to learn more about the guts
of how Django manages hashes,
I would suggest reading the
{{< extlink "https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/3.1/topics/auth/passwords/" "Password management in Django" >}}
docs
to see the details.

## Authentication Views

Is Django going to expect you to call the `authenticate` function
and wire together all the views yourself?
No!

You can add the set of views
with a single `include`:

```python
# project/urls.py

from django.urls import include, path

urlpatterns = [
    ...
    path("accounts/", include("django.contrib.auth.urls")),
]
```

This set includes a variety of features.

* A login view
* A logout view
* Views to change a password
* Views to reset a password

The {{< extlink "https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/3.1/topics/auth/default/#all-authentication-views" "All authentication views" >}}
documentation provides information
about each view
and the name of each template
to override.

We've now seen how Django authenticates users
to a website
with the `User` model,
the `authenticate` function,
and the built-in authentication backend, `ModelBackend`.
We've also seen how Django provides views
to assist
with login, logout, and password management.

Once a user is authenticated,
what is that user allowed to do?
We'll see that next as we explore authorization
in Django.

## What's Allowed?

### Authorization From User Attributes

The `User` model includes an `is_authenticated` attribute.
Predictably,
users that have authenticated will return `True`
for `is_authenticated`
while `AnonymousUser` instances return `False`
for the same attribute.

Django provides a `login_required` decorator
that can use this `is_authenticated` information.
The decorator will gate any view
that needs a user to be authenticated.

There are other boolean values
on the `User` model
that you can use for authorization checking.

* `is_staff` is a boolean to decide
    whether a user is a staff member or not.
    By default,
    this boolean is `False`.
    Only staff-level users are allowed
    to use the built-in Django admin site.
    You can also use the `staff_member_required` decorator
    if you have views that should only be used
    by members of your team
    with that permission.
* `is_superuser` is a special flag
    to indicate a user
    that should have access to everything.
    This "superuser" concept is very similar
    to the superuser that is present
    in Linux permission systems.
    There's no special decorator
    for this boolean,
    but you could use the `user_passes_test` decorator
    if you had very private views
    that you needed to protect.

```python
from django.contrib.admin.views.decorators import staff_member_required
from django.contrib.auth.decorators import user_passes_test
from django.http import HttpResponse

@staff_member_required
def a_staff_view(request):
    return HttpResponse("You are a user with staff level permission.")

def check_superuser(user):
    return user.is_superuser

@user_passes_test(check_superuser)
def special_view(request):
    return HttpResponse("Super special response")
```

### Authorization From Permissions And Groups

Django comes with a flexible permission system
that can let your application control
who can see what.
The permission system includes some convenient auto-created permissions
as well as the ability to make custom permission
for whatever purpose.
These permission records are `Permission` model instances
from `django.contrib.auth.models`.

If you have a `pizzas` app
and create a `Topping` model,
Django would create the following permissions:

* `pizzas.add_topping` for Create
* `pizzas.view_topping` for Read
* `pizzas.change_topping` for Update
* `pizzas.delete_topping` for Delete

```python
from django.contrib.auth.models import Permission, User
from django.contrib.contenttypes.models import ContentType
from pizzas.models import Topping

content_type = ContentType.objects.get_for_model(Topping)
permission = Permission.objects.get(
    content_type=content_type, codename="add_topping")
chef_id = 42
chef = User.objects.get(id=42)
chef.user_permissions.add(permission)
```

Django has an ability to create groups
to alleviate the problem
of adding permissions
for one user at a time.
The `Group` model is the intersection
between a set of permissions
and a set of users.
Thus,
you could create a group
like "Support Team,"
assign all the permissions
that such a team should have,
and include all your support staff
on that team.
Now,
any time that the support staff members require a new permission,
it can be added once
to the group.

A user's groups are tracked
with another `ManyToManyField`
called `groups`.

```python
from django.contrib.auth.models import Group, User

support_team = Group.objects.get(name="Support Team")
support_sally = User.objects.get(username="sally")
support_sally.groups.add(support_team)
```

In addition to the built-in permissions
that Django creates
and the group management system,
you can create additional permissions
for your own purposes.

```python
from django.contrib.auth.models import Permission, User
from django.contrib.contenttypes.models import ContentType
from pizzas.models import Pizza

content_type = ContentType.objects.get_for_model(Pizza)
permission = Permission.objects.create(
    codename="can_bake",
    name="Can Bake Pizza",
    content_type=content_type,
)
chef_id = 42
chef = User.objects.get(id=42)
chef.user_permissions.add(permission)
```

To check on the permission in our code,
you can use the `has_perm` method
on the `User` model.
`has_perm` expects an application label
and the permission codename
joined together
by a period.

```python
>>> chef = User.objects.get(id=42)
>>> chef.has_perm('pizzas.can_bake')
True
```

You can also use a decorator
on a view
to check a permission as well.
The decorator will check the `request.user`
for the proper permission.

```python
# pizzas/views.py

from django.contrib.auth.decorators import permission_required

@permission_required('pizzas.can_bake')
def bake_pizza(request):
    # Time to bake the pizza if you're allowed.
    ...
```

## Working With Users In Views And Templates

The first way
to interact with users
is inside of views.
Part of configuring the auth system is to include the `AuthenticationMiddleware`
in `django.contrib.auth.middleware`.

```python
# application/views.py

from django.http import HttpResponse

def my_view(request):
    if request.user.is_authenticated:
        return HttpResponse('You are logged in.')
    else:
        return HttpResponse('Hello guest!')
```

How about templates?
If you had to add a user
to a view's context
for every view,
that would be tedious.

Thankfully,
there is a context processor
named `auth`
that let's you avoid that pain
(the processor is in `django.contrib.auth.context_processors`).
The context processor will add a `user`
to the context
of every view
when processing a request.

Since the `AuthenticationMiddleware` adds the `user`
to the `request`,
the context processor has the very trivial job
of creating a dictionary
like `{'user': request.user}`.
There's a bit more to the actual implementation,
and you can check out the
{{< extlink "https://github.com/django/django/blob/d1791539a7d86739cd44c909fa8239cae7f85874/django/contrib/auth/context_processors.py#L46" "Django source code" >}}
if you want to see those details.

Now you've seen how Django leverages the auth middleware
to make users easily accessible
to your views and templates.

## Summary

In this episode,
we looked into the auth system.

We saw:

* How auth is set up
* What the `User` model is
* How authentication works
* Django's built-in views for making a login system
* What levels of authorization are available
* How to access users in views and templates

## Next Time

On the next episode,
we'll discuss middleware
in Django.
As the name implies,
middleware is some code
that exists
in the "middle"
of the request and response process.

You can follow the show
on {{< extlink "https://open.spotify.com/show/1RtdveQIz5m5MqLKPWbhnD" "Spotify" >}}.
Or follow me or the show
on X
at
{{< extlink "https://x.com/mblayman" "@mblayman" >}}
or
{{< extlink "https://x.com/djangoriffs" "@djangoriffs" >}}.

Please rate or review
on Apple Podcasts, Spotify,
or from wherever you listen to podcasts.
Your rating will help others discover the podcast,
and I would be very grateful.

Django Riffs is supported by listeners like *you*.
If you can contribute financially
to cover hosting and production costs,
please check out my {{< extlink "https://www.patreon.com/mblayman" "Patreon page" >}}
to see how you can help out.
