---
title: "Make A Hugo Static Blog Inside A Django App"
description: >-
    Without using a subdomain,
    Django's static files,
    or a reverse proxy,
    can you build a statically generated blog
    into your Django app?
    Yes!
    I'll show you how I created a static blog
    in Hugo
    and added it to my Django project.
image: /static/img/2020/design-sketches.jpg
date: 2020-11-16
slug: hugo-blog-in-django-app
categories:
  - Python
  - Django
tags:
  - Python
  - Django
  - Hugo
  - WhiteNoise
  - Gunicorn

---

I have a side project
and I'd like to do some content marketing
to potential customers
to show how my product is useful.
To do this,
I **need a blog
for my project**.

Maybe you need a blog for your project too.
Have you thought about where your blog will exist on the internet?
For me,
I considered two choices:

1. Use a subdomain like `blog.mysite.com`.
2. Use a route style like `mysite.com/blog/`.
    (I learned in my research
    that SEO experts call this a "subfolder" style.)

I chose the latter approach.

I'm also a big fan of statically generated websites.
I like to keep my articles
in version control
and write my content in Markdown.
This approach works well
for my writing flow.
In fact,
if you're reading this on my website,
[mattlayman.com](https://www.mattlayman.com/),
you're reading content that was generated
by [Hugo](https://gohugo.io/),
my static site generator of choice.

Since my Django application runs
on my main domain,
how could I include a route-based blog
onto the domain
without tripping over the app?

I could see two strategies to making a route-based blog work.

1. Put some software *between* browsers
    and my application server
    that can intercept
    and route blog traffic
    to the static files
    generated by Hugo.
2. Make the application server serve the blog.

## Putting Software In Front Of The App Server

This is a well-trodden path.
This is also the path that I *didn't* pick
(more on that later).

In many (most?) Django deployments,
the Django application runs
with a Python application server
like
[Gunicorn](https://gunicorn.org/)
or
[uWSGI](https://uwsgi-docs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/).
These application servers have the job
of delegating the dynamic requests
to Django views.

What do we do with requests that aren't dynamic
like JavaScript or image files?
Django has a process to manage these static files
that will collect all the files
into a single directory
that can be served
by other software.

What other software?
Typically,
that other software is a general purpose web server
like
[Nginx](https://www.nginx.com/)
or the
[Apache HTTP Server](https://httpd.apache.org/).
When one of these web servers is
in between
and delegating to the Python application server,
we call the web server a reverse proxy.

Check out [Cloudflare's reverse proxy](https://www.cloudflare.com/learning/cdn/glossary/reverse-proxy/)
article
for a good explanation
of why this kind of server is considered a reverse proxy.

A web server like Nginx can be configured
to serve static files
at a particular route.
For Django's typical static file handling,
you would configure Nginx
to route the static files directory
that Django produces
to something like `/static/`.
For any request
for a static file
that comes to your site,
Nginx would detect that the path starts
with `/static/`
and would send back the file directly
rather than requesting it
from the application server.

Knowing that,
it's not much of a conceptual leap
to see how to serve a static blog.
In this scenario,
you would generate the blog
with your tool of choice
and configure Nginx
to route anything coming to `/blog/`
to the output of your static site generator.

To be frank,
if your infrastructure can handle this style well,
this will probably be an easier approach.
If you're feeling a bit more adventurous
or like walking a different path,
read on.

## The Road Less Traveled

Another way of serving static files
for your Django app is
to let the application server do it.
This approach is not as performant
as the reverse proxy approach,
but it has the advantage
of being a simpler setup
because you only have one kind of server running, not two.

When you want to use this style,
you'd reach for
[WhiteNoise](http://whitenoise.evans.io/en/stable/).

For Django projects,
WhiteNoise is designed
to work
with Django's static files scheme.
That means that the library will have no trouble serving your CSS, JS, images,
or whatever else.
This also means
that you can expect all of these files
to be served out of `/static/`.

If you're ok with serving your blog
from `/static/blog/`,
then your life would be pretty simple.
When you deploy,
you'd generate your blog content
from your static site generator,
include the output directory
as a directory
in the `STATICFILES_DIRS` Django setting,
and you're done.

That kind of URL path sounds gross to me.
What casual non-tech reader would expect
to read a blog post
at `/static/blog/`?
Yuck.
That kind of reader is unlikely to know what "static" would mean.

My goal was to get WhiteNoise
to serve my blog
at `/blog/`.
That's the setup.
Let's see how it worked out.

## The Details

Before seeing all the details,
let me make sure I address why I did this.

My application is running on
[Heroku](https://www.heroku.com/).
Heroku makes deployment so simple
for basic apps.
With a small file
called a `Procfile`
that looks like

```Procfile
release: python manage.py migrate
web: gunicorn project.wsgi --log-file -
```

I can get an entirely operational application
on their platform.
The downside of using a Platform as a Service (PaaS)
like Heroku
is that I have less control
of the environment.

In this circumstance,
I don't have the ability
to introduce a reverse proxy like Nginx.
I could cobble together some scheme
with a shell script
that would let me run both Nginx
and Gunicorn,
but I'd have difficulty guaranteeing
that both processes would stay running.

Unless I wanted the blog
to run on a separate subdomain,
which I already mentioned
that I don't,
I need to make the Gunicorn application server serve the blog.

First,
let's get the blog itself going.
I'm going to skip most
of the details
of working
with Hugo,
but I want you to have some names
that you can consider
as we work through this problem.
From the root
of my repository,
I ran:

```bash
$ hugo new site blog
```

This created a new Hugo site with some empty directories.
Because I wanted to keep all
of the directories,
I added some hidden files
so that Git would track them.
For example,

```bash
$ touch blog/data/.gitkeep
```

Later in my experimentation,
I found that the `config.toml` needed
to be in the root
of the repository.
Since I didn't want to fill the repository root
with other Hugo directories,
I had to adjust some variables
in the config file
to look in the `blog` directory.

```toml
# config.toml

archetypeDir = "blog/archetypes"
contentDir = "blog/content"
data = "blog/data"
layoutDir = "blog/layouts"
staticDir = "blog/static"
themesDir = "blog/themes"
```

I also set the directory
where I wanted the blog output.

```toml
# config.toml

publishDir = "blog_out"
```

To finish off the Hugo setup
(aside from the actual blog content generation
which I'm not going to describe),
I added Hugo generated directories
to my `.gitignore`.

```gitignore
# Blog
blog_out/
resources/
```

With this much configuration,
I can generate my product's blog
with a single command.

```bash
$ hugo

                    | EN
+------------------+----+
  Pages            | 13
  Paginator pages  |  0
  Non-page files   |  2
  Static files     | 10
  Processed images |  7
  Aliases          |  0
  Sitemaps         |  1
  Cleaned          |  0

Total in 14 ms
```

14ms! It's so fast!

My next job was to teach Heroku how
to generate the blog
with each deployment.
Heroku tries to figure out how
to build your application
by checking for certain files.
Because of the `manage.py` file,
Heroku detected
that I have a Python project.

When there are multiple types of things to build,
you have to be a bit more explicit.
Thus,
I needed to add a
[buildpack](https://devcenter.heroku.com/articles/buildpacks).
Buildpacks are responsible
for assembling a project's code
into a format
that the Heroku platform can run.
To make Hugo go,
I added the `roperzh/hugo` community contributed buildpack.

```bash
$ heroku buildpacks:add --index 1 roperzh/hugo
```

I set my Hugo version
in Heroku
to the same version
that I use locally
on my Mac
to ensure consistency.

```bash
$ heroku config:set HUGO_VERSION=0.46
```

From this configuration,
my Heroku deployments now build my Hugo blog
and store the output content
in the `blog_out` directory
of the built application artifact
(which Heroku calls a "slug").

We can take another step
to optimize the blog.
WhiteNoise will serve a compressed version
(either gzip or brotli)
if there is a file
on disk
with the same name
and ending with a `.gz` or `.br` extension
(e.g., `index.html` and `index.html.gz`).

Once Hugo is done generating the blog output,
we can instruct WhiteNoise
to compress the files.
To do this,
I used a `bin/post_compile` script
that runs as part of the Python buildpack.
My script looks like:

```bash
#!/bin/bash

set -e

python -m whitenoise.compress blog_out
```

This generates the compressed versions
so that my application server can serve fewer bytes
when sending static blog files
to a browser.

Now that the static content side is ready
to go,
let's teach Django how to serve the blog.

In Django,
WhiteNoise works
by running a Django middleware.
This middleware is designed
to run very early
in the stack
of middleware
to intercept requests
to static files
and return them
before the application server wastes too much time
processing the request.

The problem with the middlware
(if I can even call it a problem)
is that it is designed
to work exclusively
with the static files mechanism
that Django exposes as the static files interface.
This means that it serves content
for `/static/` URLs
from directories
that are either in `static` directories
inside of each Django app
or static files included
in `STATICFILES_DIRS`.

Unfortunately,
there's no
[Django setting](http://whitenoise.evans.io/en/stable/django.html#available-settings)
that will permit a developer
to say
"Hey, WhiteNoise,
please serve these files
at this other path too!"

My solution to this dilemma was to "use the source, Luke (uh, Matt)!"
You can see in
[Using WhiteNoise with any WSGI application](http://whitenoise.evans.io/en/stable/base.html)
that the `WhiteNoise` class has a method
named `add_files`.
This method takes a directory
and serves those files
at some developer-defined prefix.

While inspecting the source,
I found that the `WhiteNoiseMiddleware` is a subclass of `WhiteNoise`.

Enter `MoreWhiteNoiseMiddleware`.

I decided to make a subclass
of the `WhiteNoiseMiddleware`
to take advantage
of the `add_files` method
for my Django project.
(My side project is called "homeschool"
so you'll see that in the code snippets below.)

```python
# homeschool/middlware.py

from django.conf import settings
from whitenoise.middleware import WhiteNoiseMiddleware

class MoreWhiteNoiseMiddleware(WhiteNoiseMiddleware):
    def __init__(self, get_response=None, settings=settings):
        super().__init__(get_response, settings=settings)
        for more_noise in settings.MORE_WHITENOISE:
            self.add_files(
                more_noise["directory"], prefix=more_noise["prefix"])

```

Then I made the following changes to my settings file.

```python
# project/settings.py

MIDDLEWARE = [
    "django.middleware.security.SecurityMiddleware",
    "homeschool.middleware.MoreWhiteNoiseMiddleware",
    ...
]

...

MORE_WHITENOISE = [
    {"directory": os.path.join(BASE_DIR, "blog_out"), "prefix": "blog/"}
]

WHITENOISE_INDEX_FILE = True
```

That last setting will make sure
that WhiteNoise serves any directory
with an `index.html`
as the file.
That means that my blog post content
that Hugo puts
into `/blog/some-post/index.html`
will be accessible
at `mysite.com/blog/some-post/`.

Other rules about this setting are
[in the documentation](http://whitenoise.evans.io/en/stable/django.html#index-files).

With this tiny middleware subclass,
I can serve up more static directories!
My product blog is served up
at the pretty `/blog/` URLs
that I wanted.
**Victory!**

I'm only doing this for my product's blog now,
but I will probably do something similar
with the product documentation
in the future.

## Tradeoffs

What's the catch?
It seems like there's always a catch.

The biggest catch is caching, or, the *lack thereof*.
With the scheme I've described,
Django isn't able to generate filenames
for the blog files
that include the hash of the file content.

In a normal static files setup,
you can use
[ManifestStaticFilesStorage](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/3.1/ref/contrib/staticfiles/#manifeststaticfilesstorage)
to generate those file names.
With that storage engine,
Django will create a manifest file
that stores a dictionary
of original filenames
to the versioned filename
that includes the hash.
Django uses the manifest during template rendering
to serve up HTML content
that includes the hashes
(e.g., a file named `base.css` would be sent
to the user as `base.1234abcd.css`).

Because Django sends out the versioned filenames
for browsers,
when the browser comes back to the server
to request a CSS file
like `base.1234abcd.css`,
WhiteNoise can detect
that the file is "versioned."
With a versioned file,
WhiteNoise will set the `Cache-Control` HTTP cache header
to tell the browser
that the file can be safely cached
for a very long time.

The content generated by Hugo doesn't go
through the Django template engine
and won't include those version hashes.
Thus,
WhiteNoise can't detect the files won't change
because of the absense
of hashes.
Since the code doesn't know
if the file will change,
it can't set `Cache-Control` far into the future.
Instead,
it will set the header
to one minute
which is configurable
via the
[WHITENOISE_MAX_AGE](http://whitenoise.evans.io/en/stable/django.html#WHITENOISE_MAX_AGE)
setting.

For a small product like mine,
this tradeoff is totally reasonable.
If I had a product blog
with massive amounts
of traffic,
I'd probably have a more complex infrastructure anyway
and be in a position
to use a reverse proxy instead.

The other minor tradeoff is
that `WHITENOISE_INDEX_FILE` setting.
By enabling that,
I open up my Django server
to serving directories
that include `index.html`.
This is good and desirable
for the blog,
but the side effect is
that any other directory
in my static files
that happens to have an `index.html` file
in it
is also now available.
That may not affect your app
if you try this approach,
but it's something to be cognizant of.

## Summary

I started this adventure
by looking for an alternative way
to serve a blog
for my Heroku project.

In the process,
we learned about:

* Heroku buildpacks and how to use multiple buildpacks
    to generate an app that requires multiple tools
* WhiteNoise and how to customize the middleware
    to give it more files to serve
* Caching and the tradeoffs associated with my approach

I hope you found this little adventure interesting.
Next time you need some static content
for your Django project outside
of `/static/`,
now you know
of an option
that doesn't include subdomains
or a reverse proxy!

If you have questions
or enjoyed this article,
please feel free to message me on X
at [@mblayman](https://x.com/mblayman)
or share if you think others might be interested too.
