---
title: "Per-visitor Data With Sessions"
description: >-
    How does Django know
    when a user is logged in?
    Where can the framework store data
    for a visitor on your app?
    In this article,
    we'll answer those questions
    and look at a storage concept
    in Django
    called sessions.
image: img/django.png
type: post
categories:
 - Python
 - Django
tags:
 - Python
 - Django
 - sessions
series: "Understand Django"

---

In the last
{{< web >}}
[Understand Django]({{< ref "/understand-django/_index.md" >}})
article,
{{< /web >}}
{{< book >}}
chapter,
{{< /book >}}
we saw
what it takes
to make your Django project live
on the internet.
Now,
we'll get back to a more narrow topic
and focus on a way Django can store data
for visitors to your site.
This is the kind of data
that doesn't often fit well
into your Django models
and is called *session* data.

{{< understand-django-series "sessions" >}}

## What Is A Session?

As *I* was learning Django,
I'd run into sessions occasionally
and accept that I didn't really understand them.
They felt like magic to me.
But what is a session?

> A session is a set of data
that is available to users
that Django can use over multiple requests.

From a development perspective,
the data is different
from the regular data
that you would store in a database
with Django models.
When working with session data,
you don't query the database
using the ORM.
Instead,
you can access session content
via the `request.session` attribute.

The `request.session` is a dictionary-like object.
Storing data into the session is like working
with any other Python dictionary.

```python
# application/view.py

from django.http import HttpResponse

def a_session_view(request):
    request.session['data_to_keep'] = 'store this'
    return HttpReponse('')
```

When Django stores the session data,
the framework will keep the data
in a JSON format.
What is JSON?
I've mentioned JSON in passing
{{< web >}}
in previous articles,
{{< /web >}}
{{< book >}}
in previous chapters,
{{< /book >}}
but now is a decent time to explain it.
Knowing what JSON is will help you understand
what happens to session data
as the data is stored.

### The "What is JSON?" Sidebar

JSON is a data format.
JSON is a way of describing data
so that the data can be stored
or transmitted.
The definition of that format is listed
on the official {{< extlink "https://www.json.org/json-en.html" "JSON website" >}}
and can be understood
in probably 10 minutes or less.

That stored data can be parsed
based on the definition of the format
to recreate the data
at a different time
or on a different computer.
In general,
you can view JSON as a tool
to take Python dictionaries or lists
and store or transmit them
for use elsewhere.

The Python standard library includes a module
for working with JSON data.
Here's an example to give you an idea
of what JSON output looks like.

```python
>>> import json
>>> data = {'hello': 'world'}
>>> json.dumps(data)
'{"hello": "world"}'
>>> json_string = json.dumps(data)
>>> parsed_data = json.loads(json_string)
>>> parsed_data
{'hello': 'world'}
>>> data == parsed_data
True
```

The `dumps` and `loads` functions transform data
to and from a string, respectively
(the `s` in the those function names stands for "string").

JSON is an extremely versatile format
and is used all over the internet.
Getting back to sessions,
JSON is a good fit
because there are multiple places
where Django can store session data.
Let's look at those next.

## Session Storage

{{< web >}}
You probably know this drill by now
if you've been following this series.
{{< /web >}}
{{< book >}}
You probably know this drill by now.
{{< /book >}}
Like the template system,
the ORM,
and the authentication system,
the session application is configurable
with multiple different "engines"
to store session data.

When you start a new Django project
with the `startproject` command,
the session engine will be set
to `django.contrib.sessions.backends.db`.
This is because the `SESSION_ENGINE` setting will be unset
in your settings module,
and Django will fall back to the default.

With this engine,
Django will store session data
in the database.
Because `startproject` includes the `django.contrib.sessions` app
in `INSTALLED_APPS`,
you'd probably see the following stream by
when you migrate your database
for the first time.

```text
(venv) $ ./manage.py migrate
  ...
Running migrations:
  ...
  Applying sessions.0001_initial... OK
```

The `Session` model stores three things:

* A session key that uniquely identifies the session
  in the storage engine
* The actual session data,
  stored in JSON format,
  in a `TextField`
* An expiration date for the session data

With these three fields,
Django can handle the temporary storage needs
for any of your site's visitors.

Why is the session engine configurable?
Django's session storage is configurable
to manage tradeoffs.
The default storage of a database engine
is a safe default
and the easiest to understand.
The answer to "Where is my app's session data?"
is "In the database with all of my other application data."

If your site grows in popularity
and usage,
using the database to store sessions can become a bottleneck
and limit your performance and application scaling.
Additionally,
the default engine creates an ever expanding set
of database rows in the `Session` model's table.
You can work around the second challenge
by periodically running the `clearsessions` management command,
but what if the performance is a problem for you?

This is where other storage engines might be better
for your application.
One method to improve performance is
to switch to an engine
that uses caching.
If you have set up the caching system
with a technology
like {{< extlink "https://redis.io/" "Redis" >}}
or {{< extlink "https://memcached.org/" "Memcached" >}},
then a lot of session load
on the database
can be pushed to the cache service.
Caching is a topic we will explore more
{{< web >}}
in a future article,
{{< /web >}}
{{< book >}}
in a future chapter,
{{< /book >}}
so if this doesn't make too much sense right now,
I apologize for referencing concepts
that I haven't introduced yet.
For the time being,
understand that caching can improve session performance.

Another session storage engine
that can remove load
from a database
uses the browser's cookie system.
This system will certainly remove database load
because the state will be stored
with the browser,
but this strategy comes
with its own set
of tradeoffs.
With cookie-base storage:

* The storage could be cleared at any time
  by the user.
* The storage engine is limited to a small amount
  of data storage
  by the browser,
  based on the maximum allowed size
  of a cookie
  (commonly, only 4kB).

Choosing the right session storage engine
for your application depends
on what the app does.
If you're in doubt,
start with the default of database-backed storage,
and you should be fine initially.

## How Does The Session System Identify Visitors?

When a visitor comes to your site,
Django needs to associate the session data
to the visitor.
To do this association,
Django will store a session identifier
in a cookie
on the user's browser.

On the first visit,
the session storage engine will look
for a cookie
with the name `sessionid` (by default).
If the application doesn't find that cookie,
then the session storage will generate a random ID
and ensure that the random ID doesn't conflict
with any other session IDs
that already exist.

From there, the storage engine will store some session data
via whatever mechanism that engine uses
(e.g., the database engine will create a new session row
in the table).

The session ID is added
to the user's browser cookies
for your site's domain.
Cookies are stored in a secured manner
so only that browser will have access
to that randomly generated value.
The session ID is very long (32 characters),
and the session will expire after a given length of time.
These characteristics make session IDs quite secure.

Since sessions are secure
and can uniquely identify a browser,
what kind of data can we put in there?

## What Uses Sessions?

Sessions can store all kinds of data,
but what are some real world use cases?
You can look
in Django's source code
to find some immediate answers!

In my estimate,
the most used part of Django
that uses sessions heavily
is the auth system.
We explored the authentication and authorization system
{{< web >}}
in [User Authentication]({{< ref "/understand-django/2020-11-04-user-authentication.md" >}}).
{{< /web >}}
{{< book >}}
in the User Authentication chapter.
{{< /book >}}
At the time,
I mentioned
in the pre-requisites
that sessions were required,
but I noted that sessions were an internal detail.
Now that you know what sessions are about,
let's see how the auth system uses them.

If you look into the session data
after you've authenticated,
you'll find three pieces of information:

* The user's ID (stored in `_auth_user_id`)
* The user's hash (stored in `_auth_user_hash`)
* The string name of the auth backend used 
  (stored in `_auth_user_backend`)

Since we know that a session identifies a browser
and does so securely,
the auth system stores identity information
into the session
to tie that unique session to a unique user.
When a user's browser makes an HTTP request,
Django can determine the session associated
with the request
via the `sessionid`
and gain access to the user auth data
(i.e., the user's ID, hash, and auth backend).
With these data elements,
the auth system can determine
if the request is valid
and should be considered authenticated
by checking against the associated auth session data.

The auth system will read which backend is used
and load that backend if possible.
The backend is used to load the specific user record
from the ID found
in the session.
Finally,
that user is used to check
if the hash provided validates
when compared to the user's hashed password
(there is some extra hashing involved
to ensure that the user's password hash is not stored directly
in the session).
If the comparison checks out,
the user is authenticated
and the request proceeds as an authenticated request.

You can see that the session is vital
to this flow with the auth system.
Without the ability to store state
in the session,
the user would be unable
to prove who they were.

Another use of sessions is found
with CSRF handling.
The CSRF security features in Django
{{< web >}}
(which I mentioned in the forms article
{{< /web >}}
{{< book >}}
(which I mentioned in the forms chapter
{{< /book >}}
and we will explore more in a future topic)
permit CSRF tokens to be stored
in the session
instead of a cookie
when the `CSRF_USE_SESSIONS` setting is enabled.
Django provides a safe default
for CSRF tokens
in cookies,
but the session is an alternative storage place
if you're not happy enough
with the cookie configuration.

As a final example,
we can look
at the `messages` application.
The `messages` app can store "flash" messages.
A flash message is the kind
of message
that you'd expect to see
on a single page view.
For instance,
if you have a message
that you'd like to display
to a user upon some action,
you might use a flash message.
Perhaps your application has some "Contact Us" form
to receive customer feedback.
After the customer submits the form,
you might want the application
to flash "Thank you for the feedback!"

```python
# application/views.py

from django.contrib import messages
from django.views.generic import FormView
from django.urls import reverse_lazy

from .forms import ContactForm

class ContactView(FormView):
    form_class = ContactForm
    success_url = reverse_lazy("application:index")

    def form_valid(self, form):
        messages.info(
            self.request,
            "Thank you for the feedback!"
        )
        return super().form_valid(form)
```

In the default setup,
Django will attempt to store the flash message
in the request's cookies,
but, as we saw earlier,
browsers constrain the maximum cookie size.
If the flash messages will not fit in the request's cookies,
then the `messages` app will switch
to the session as a more robust alternative.
Observe that this might run into problems
if you are using the session's cookie storage engine!

I hope that these examples from Django's `contrib` package provide you
with some ideas for how you might use sessions
in your own projects.

## Summary

{{< web >}}
In this article,
{{< /web >}}
{{< book >}}
In this chapter,
{{< /book >}}
we dug into Django sessions
and how you use them.
We saw:

* What sessions are and the interface they expose as `request.session`
* How JSON is used to manage session data
* Different kinds of session storage
    that are available to your site
* The way that Django recognizes a user's session in the browser
* Examples within `django.contrib`
    of how sessions get used by Django's built-in apps.

{{< web >}}
In the next article,
{{< /web >}}
{{< book >}}
In the next chapter,
{{< /book >}}
we are going to spend time focusing
on settings in Django.
You'll learn about:

* Various strategies for managing your project's settings
* Django's tools to help with settings
* Tools in the larger Django ecosystem that can make your life easier

{{< web >}}
If you'd like to follow along
with the series,
please feel free to sign up
for my newsletter
where I announce all of my new content.
If you have other questions,
you can reach me online
on Twitter
where I am
{{< extlink "https://twitter.com/mblayman" "@mblayman" >}}.
{{< /web >}}
