---
title: "Making Sense Of Settings"
description: >-
    All Django apps need to be configured
    in order to run properly.
    In this article,
    we will dig into how Django lets you configure your project
    using a settings module.
    We'll also look at ways to be extra effective
    with settings.
image: /static/img/django.png
slug: settings
date: 2021-07-15
categories:
 - Python
 - Django
tags:
 - Python
 - Django
 - settings
series: "Understand Django"

---

In the last
{{< web >}}
[Understand Django](/blog/understand-django)
article,
{{< /web >}}
we looked at a storage concept
in Django
called sessions.
Sessions provide a solution to problems
like
"How does Django know
when a user is logged in?" or
"Where can the framework store data
for a visitor on your app?"

{{< web >}}
With this article,
{{< /web >}}
you'll learn about Django settings
and how to manage the configuration
of your application.
We'll also look at tools
to help you
define your settings effectively.

1. [From Browser To Django](/understand-django/browser-to-django)
2. [URLs Lead The Way](/understand-django/urls-lead-way)
3. [Views On Views](/understand-django/views-on-views)
4. [Templates For User Interfaces](/understand-django/templates-user-interfaces)
5. [User Interaction With Forms](/understand-django/user-interaction-forms)
6. [Store Data With Models](/understand-django/store-data-with-models)
7. [Administer All The Things](/understand-django/administer-all-the-things)
8. [Anatomy Of An Application](/understand-django/anatomy-of-an-application)
9. [User Authentication](/understand-django/user-authentication)
10. [Middleware Do You Go?](/understand-django/middleware-do-you-go)
11. [Serving Static Files](/understand-django/serving-static-files)
12. [Test Your Apps](/understand-django/test-your-apps)
13. [Deploy A Site Live](/understand-django/deploy-site-live)
14. [Per-visitor Data With Sessions](/understand-django/sessions)
15. Making Sense Of Settings
16. [User File Use](/understand-django/media-files)
17. [Command Your App](/understand-django/command-apps)
18. [Go Fast With Django](/understand-django/go-fast)
19. [Security And Django](/understand-django/secure-apps)
20. [Debugging Tips And Techniques](/understand-django/debugging-tips-techniques)

## How Is Django Configured?

To run properly,
Django needs to be configured.
We need to understand
where this configuration comes from.
Django has the ability
to use default configuration values
or values set
by developers like yourself,
but where does it get those from?

Early in the process
of starting a Django application,
Django will internally import the following:

```python
from django.conf import settings
```

This `settings` import is a package level object
created in `django/conf/__init__.py`.
The `settings` object has attributes added to it
from two primary sources.

The first source is a set of global default settings
that come from the framework.
These global settings are from `django/conf/global_settings.py`
and provide a set of initial values
for configuration
that Django needs to operate.

The second source of configuration settings comes
from user defined values.
Django will accept a Python module
and apply its module level attributes
to the `settings` object.
To find the user module,
Django searches for a `DJANGO_SETTINGS_MODULE` environment variable.

### Sidebar: Environment Variables

Environment variables are not a Django concept.
When any program runs
on a computer,
the operating system makes certain data available
to the running program.
This set of data is called the program's "environment,"
and each piece of data
in that set
is an environment variable.

If you're starting Django from a terminal,
you can view the environment variables
that Django will receive from the operating system
by running the `env` command on macOS or Linux,
or the `set` command on Windows.

We can add our own environment variables
to the environment
with the `export` command on macOS or Linux,
or the `set` command on Windows.
Environment variables are typically named
in all capital letters.

```bash
$ export HELLO=world
```

Now that we have a basic understanding
of environment variables,
let's return to the `DJANGO_SETTINGS_MODULE` variable.
The variable's value should be the location
of a Python module containing any settings
that a developer wants to change
from Django's default values.

If you create a Django project
with `startproject`
and use `project` as the name,
then you will find a generated settings file
with the path `project/settings.py`.
When Django runs,
you could explicitly instruct Django with:

```bash
$ export DJANGO_SETTINGS_MODULE=project.settings
```

Instead of supplying the file path,
the `DJANGO_SETTINGS_MODULE` should be
in a Python module dotted notation.

You may not actually need
to set `DJANGO_SETTINGS_MODULE` explicitly.
If you stick with the same settings file
that is created by `startproject`,
you can find a line
in `wsgi.py`
that looks like:

```python
os.environ.setdefault(
    'DJANGO_SETTINGS_MODULE',
    'project.settings'
)
```

Because of this line,
Django will attempt to read
from `project.settings`
(or whatever you named your project)
without the need to explicitly set `DJANGO_SETTINGS_MODULE`.
Feel free to adjust the default value
if you have a different settings file
that you prefer to use
for local development.

Once Django reads the global settings
and any user defined settings,
we can get any configuration
from the `settings` object
via attribute access.
This convention of keeping all configuration
in the `settings` object
is a convenient pattern
that the framework,
third party library ecosystem,
and *you* can depend on.

```python
$ ./manage.py shell
>>> from django.conf import settings
>>> settings.SECRET_KEY
'a secret to everybody'
```

The `settings` object is a shared item
so it is generally thought
to be a Really Bad Idea™
to edit and assign to the object directly.
Keep your settings in your settings module!

That's the core of Django configuration.
We're ready to focus
on the user defined settings
and our responsibilities
as Django app developers.

## Settings Module Patterns

There are multiple ways to deal
with settings modules
and how to populate those modules
with the appropriate values
for different environments.
Let's look at some popular patterns.

### Multiple Modules Per Environment

A Django settings module is a Python module.
Nothing is stopping us
from using the full power
of Python
to configure that module the way we want.

Minimally, you will probably have at least two environments
where your Django app runs:

* On your local machine while developing
* On the internet for your live site

We should know by now
that setting `DEBUG = True` is a terrible idea
for a live Django site,
so how can we get the benefits of the debug mode
without having `DEBUG` set to `True`
in our module?

One technique is to use separate settings modules.
With this strategy,
you can pick which environment your Django app should run for
by switching the `DJANGO_SETTINGS_MODULE` value
to pick a different environment.
You might have modules like:

* `project.settings.dev`
* `project.settings.stage`
* `project.settings.production`

These examples would be for a local development environment
on your laptop,
a staging environment
(which is a commonly used pattern
for testing a site
that is as similar to the live site as possible
without *being* the live site),
and a production environment.
{{< web >}}
As a reminder from the deployment article,
{{< /web >}}
the software industry likes to call the primary site
for customers "production."

This strategy has certain challenges to consider.
Should you replicate settings
in each file
or use some common module between them?

If you decide to replicate the settings across modules,
you'll have the advantage that the settings module shows *all*
of the settings in a single place
for that environment.
The disadvantage is that keeping the common settings the same
could be a challenge
if you forget to update one of the modules.

On the other hand,
you could use a common module.
The advantage to this form is that the common settings can be
in a single location.
The environment specific files only need to record the *differences*
between the environments.
The disadvantage is that it is harder to get a clear picture
of all the settings of that environment.

If you decide to use a common module,
this style is often implemented
with a `*` import.
I can probably count on one hand the number
of places
where I'm ok with a `*` import,
and this is one of them.
In most cases the Python community prefers explicit over implicit,
and the idea extends to the treatment of imports.
Explicit imports make it clear what a module is actually using.
The `*` import is very implicit,
and it makes it unclear what a module uses.
For the case of a common settings module,
a `*` import is actually positive
because we want to use *everything*
in the common module.

Let's make this more concrete.
Assume that you have a `project.settings.base` module.
This module would hold your common settings
for your app.
I'd recommend that you try to make your settings safe and secure
by default.
For instance,
use `DEBUG = False` in the base settings
and force other settings modules
to opt-in
to the more unsafe behavior.

For your local development environment
on your laptop,
you could use `project.settings.dev`.
This settings module would look like:

```python
# project/settings/dev.py

from project.settings.base import *

DEBUG = True

# Define any other settings that you want to override.
...
```

By using the `*` import in the `dev.py` file,
all the settings from `base.py` are pulled
into the module level scope.
Where you want a setting to be different,
you set the value in `dev.py`.
When Django starts using `DJANGO_SETTINGS_MODULE`
of `project.settings.dev`,
all the values from `base.py` will be used
via `dev.py`.

This scheme gives you control to define common things once,
but there is still a big challenge
with this.
What do we do about settings
that need to be kept secret
(e.g., API keys)?

*Don't commit secret data to your code repository!*
Adding secrets to your source control tool
like Git
is usually not a good idea.
This is especially true
if you have a public repository
on GitHub.
Think no one is paying attention to your repo?
Think again!
There are tools out there
that scan *every public commit* made to GitHub.
These tools are specifically looking
for secret data
to exploit.

If you can't safely add secrets
to your code repo,
where can we add them instead?
You can use environment variables!
Let's look at another scheme
for managing settings
with environment variables.

### Settings Via Environment Variables

In Python,
you can access environment variables
through the `os` module.
The module contains the `environ` attribute,
which functions like a dictionary.

By using environment variables,
your settings module can get configuration settings
from the external environment
that is running the Django app.
This is a solid pattern because it can accomplish two things:

* Secret data can be kept out of your code
* Configuration differences between environments
  can be managed by changing environment variable values

Here's an example of secret data management:

```python
# project/settings.py

import os

SECRET_KEY = os.environ['SECRET_KEY']

...
```

Django needs a secret key
for a variety of safe hashing purposes.
There is a warning in the default `startproject` output
that reads:

```python
# SECURITY WARNING: keep the secret key used in production secret!
```

By moving the secret key value
to an environment variable
that happens to have a matching name of `SECRET_KEY`,
we won't be committing the value
to source control
for some nefarious actor to discover.

This pattern works really well for secrets,
but it can also work well
for *any* configuration
that we want to vary between environments.

For instance,
on one of my projects,
I use the excellent {{< extlink "https://anymail.readthedocs.io/en/stable/" "Anymail" >}} package
to send emails
via an email service provider
(of the ESPs, I happen to use {{< extlink "https://sendgrid.com/" "SendGrid" >}}).
When I'm working with my development environment,
I don't want to send real email.
Because of that,
I use an environment variable
to set Django's `EMAIL_BACKEND` setting.
This lets me switch between the Anymail backend
and Django's built-in
`django.core.mail.backends.console.EmailBackend`
that prints emails to the terminal instead.

If I did this email configuration with `os.environ`,
it would look like:

```python
# project/settings.py

import os

EMAIL_BACKEND = os.environ.get(
    "EMAIL_BACKEND",
    "anymail.backends.sendgrid.EmailBackend"
)

...
```

I prefer to make my default settings closer
to the live site context.
This not only leads to safer behavior
(because I have to explicitly opt-out
of safer settings like switching from `DEBUG = False` to `DEBUG = True`),
but it also means that my live site has less to configure.
That's good because there are fewer chances
to make configuration mistakes
on the site that matters most:
the one where my customers are.

We need to be aware of a big gotcha
with using environment variables.
*Environment variables* are only available as a `str` type.
This is something to be aware of
because there will be times when you want a boolean settings value
or some other *type* of data.
In a situation
where you need a different type,
you have to coerce a `str`
into the type you need.
In other words,
don't forget that every string
except the empty string is truthy
in Python:

```python
>>> not_false = "False"
>>> bool(not_false)
True
```

In the next section,
we will see tools that help alleviate this typing problem.

Note:
As you learn more about settings,
you will probably encounter advice
that says to avoid using environment variables.
This is well intentioned advice
that highlights
that there *is* some risk
with using environment variables.
With this kind of advice,
you may read a recommendation
for secret management tools
like {{< extlink "https://www.vaultproject.io/" "HashiCorp Vault" >}}.
These are good tools,
but consider them a more advanced topic.
In my opinion,
using environment variables for secret management
is a reasonably low risk storage mechanism.

## Settings Management Tools

We can focus on two categories
of tools
that can help you manage your settings
in Django:
built-in tools and third party libraries.

The built-in tool that is available to you
is the `diffsettings` command.
This tool makes it easy
to see the computed settings
of your module.
Since settings can come
from multiple files
(including Django's `global_settings.py`)
or environment variables,
inspecting the settings output
of `diffsettings` is more convenient
than thinking through how a setting is set.

By default,
`diffsettings` will show a comparison
of the settings module
to the default Django settings.
Settings that aren't in the defaults are marked
with `###` after the value
to indicate that they are different.

I find that the default output is not the most useful mode.
Instead,
you can instruct `diffsettings`
to output in a "unified" format.
This format looks a lot more like a code diff.
In addition,
Django will colorize that output
so that it's easier to see.
Here's an example
of some of the security settings
by running `./manage.py diffsettings --output unified`
for one of my projects.

```diff
- SECURE_HSTS_INCLUDE_SUBDOMAINS = False
+ SECURE_HSTS_INCLUDE_SUBDOMAINS = True
- SECURE_PROXY_SSL_HEADER = None
+ SECURE_PROXY_SSL_HEADER = ('HTTP_X_FORWARDED_PROTO', 'https')
```

Finally,
I'll note that you can actually compare two separate settings modules.
Let's say you wanted to compare settings
between your development mode
and your live site.
Assuming your settings files have names
like I described earlier,
you could run something like:

```bash
$ ./manage.py diffsettings \
    --default project.settings.dev \
    --settings project.settings.production \
    --output unified
```

By using the `--default` flag,
we instruct Django that `project.settings.dev` is the baseline
for comparison.
This version of the command will show where the two settings modules are different.

Django only includes this single tool for working
with settings,
but I hope you can see that it's really handy.
Now let's talk about a useful third party library
that can help you with settings.

{{< web >}}
Earlier in the article,
{{< /web >}}
I noted that dealing with environment variables has the pitfall
of working with string data for everything.
Thankfully, there is a package
that can help you work
with environment variables.
The project is called {{< extlink "https://django-environ.readthedocs.io/en/latest/" "django-environ" >}}.
django-environ primarily does two important things
that I value:

* The package allows you to coerce strings into a desired data type.
* The package will read from a file
  to load environment variables into your environment.

What does type coercion look like?
With `django-environ`,
you start with an `Env` object.

```python
# project/settings.py

import environ

env = environ.Env()
```

The keyword arguments to `Env` describe the different environment variables
that you expect the app to process.
The key is the name of the environment variable.
The value is a two element tuple.
The first tuple element is the type you want,
and the second element is a default value
if the environment variable doesn't exist.

If you want to be able to control `DEBUG`
from an environment variable,
the settings would be:

```python
# project/settings.py

import environ

env = environ.Env(
    DEBUG=(bool, False),
)

DEBUG = env("DEBUG")
```

With this setup,
your app will be safe by default
with `DEBUG` set to `False`,
but you'll be able to override
that via the environment.
`django-environ` works with a handful
of strings that it will accept as `True`
such as "on", "yes", "true", and others
(see the documentation for more details).

Once you start using environment variables,
you'll want a convenient way to set them
when your app runs.
Manually calling `export` for all your variables
before running your app is a totally unsustainable way
to run apps.

The `Env` class comes with a handy class method named `read_env`.
With this method,
your app can read environment variables
into `os.environ`
from a file.
Conventionally,
this file is named `.env`,
and the file contains a list of key/value pairs
that you want as environment variables.
Following our earlier example,
here's how we could set our app
to be in debug mode:

```env
# .env
DEBUG=on
```

Back in the settings file, you'd include `read_env`:

```python
# project/settings.py

import environ

environ.Env.read_env()
env = environ.Env(
    DEBUG=(bool, False),
)

DEBUG = env("DEBUG")
```

If you use a `.env` file,
you will occasionally find a need to put secrets
into this file
for testing.
Since the file can be a source for secrets,
you should add this to `.gitignore`
or ignore it
in whatever version control system you use.
As time goes on,
the list of variables and settings will likely grow,
so it's also a common pattern
to create a `.env.example` file
that you can use as a template
in case you ever need to start
with a fresh clone of your repository.

## My Preferred Settings Setup

Now we've looked at multiple strategies
and tools for managing settings.
I've used many of these schemes
on various Django projects,
so what is my preferred setup?

For the majority of use cases,
I find that working with `django-environ`
in a single file is the best pattern
in my experience.

When I use this approach,
I make sure that all of my settings favor a safe default configuration.
This minimizes the configuration
that I have to do for a live site.

I like the flexibility
of the pattern,
and I find that I can quickly set certain configurations
when developing.
For instance,
when I want to do certain kinds of testing
like checking email rendering,
I'll call something like:

```bash
$ EMAIL_TESTING=on ./manage.py runserver
```

My settings file has a small amount of configuration
to alter the email settings
to point emails
to a local SMTP server tool
called {{< extlink "https://github.com/mailhog/MailHog" "MailHog" >}}.
Because I set an environment variable directly
on my command line call,
I can easily switch
into a mode that sends email
to MailHog
for quick review.

Overall,
I like the environment variable approach,
but I do use more than one settings file
for one important scenario: testing.

When I run my unit tests,
I want to guarantee
that certain conditions are always true.
There are things
that a test suite should never do
in the vast majority of cases.
Sending real emails is a good example.
If I happen to configure my `.env`
to test real emails for the local environment,
I don't want my tests
to send out an email accidentally.

Thus,
I create a separate testing settings file
and configure my test runner (pytest)
to use those settings.
This settings file *does* mostly use the base environment,
but I'll override some settings with explicit values.
Here's how I protect myself
from accidental live emails:

```python
# project/testing_settings.py

from .settings import *

# Make sure that tests are never sending real emails.
EMAIL_BACKEND = "django.core.mail.backends.locmem.EmailBackend"
```

Even though my `Env` will look for an `EMAIL_BACKEND` environment variable
to configure that setting dynamically,
the testing setting is hardcoded
to make email sending accidents impossible.

The combination of a single file
for most settings supplemented
with a testing settings file
for safety
is the approach
that has worked the best for me.

## Summary

{{< web >}}
In this article,
{{< /web >}}
you learned about Django settings
and how to manage the configuration
of your application.
We covered:

* How Django is configured
* Patterns for working with settings in your projects
* Tools that help you observe and manage settings

{{< web >}}
In the next article,
{{< /web >}}
we will look at how to handle files and media
provided by users
(e.g., profile pictures).
You'll learn about:

* How Django models maintain references to files
* How the files are managed in Django
* Packages that can store files in various cloud services

{{< web >}}
If you have questions,
you can reach me online
on X
where I am
{{< extlink "https://x.com/mblayman" "@mblayman" >}}.
{{< /web >}}
&nbsp;
