---
title: "Go Fast With Django"
description: >-
    How do you make your Django app fast?
    You measure what is slow,
    scale your system when necessary,
    and use a combination
    of fast database queries
    and strategic caching.
    In this Understand Django article,
    we'll explore those topics and more
    to help you get a performant Django app.
image: /static/img/django.png
slug: go-fast
date: 2022-01-19
categories:
 - Python
 - Django
tags:
 - Python
 - Django
 - performance
 - caching
series: "Understand Django"

---

In the last
{{< web >}}
[Understand Django](/blog/understand-django)
article,
{{< /web >}}
we learned about commands.
Commands are the way to execute scripts
that interact with your Django app.

{{< web >}}
With this article,
{{< /web >}}
we're going to dig into performance.
How do you make your Django site faster?
Keep reading to find out.

1. [From Browser To Django](/understand-django/browser-to-django)
2. [URLs Lead The Way](/understand-django/urls-lead-way)
3. [Views On Views](/understand-django/views-on-views)
4. [Templates For User Interfaces](/understand-django/templates-user-interfaces)
5. [User Interaction With Forms](/understand-django/user-interaction-forms)
6. [Store Data With Models](/understand-django/store-data-with-models)
7. [Administer All The Things](/understand-django/administer-all-the-things)
8. [Anatomy Of An Application](/understand-django/anatomy-of-an-application)
9. [User Authentication](/understand-django/user-authentication)
10. [Middleware Do You Go?](/understand-django/middleware-do-you-go)
11. [Serving Static Files](/understand-django/serving-static-files)
12. [Test Your Apps](/understand-django/test-your-apps)
13. [Deploy A Site Live](/understand-django/deploy-site-live)
14. [Per-visitor Data With Sessions](/understand-django/sessions)
15. [Making Sense Of Settings](/understand-django/settings)
16. [User File Use](/understand-django/media-files)
17. [Command Your App](/understand-django/command-apps)
18. Go Fast With Django
19. [Security And Django](/understand-django/secure-apps)
20. [Debugging Tips And Techniques](/understand-django/debugging-tips-techniques)

## Theory Of Performance

{{< web >}}
>There are two ways to make a website faster:
>
> * Do **more** work.
> * Do **less** work.
{{< /web >}}

How we do more work *and* less work depends
on the type of work
that we're trying to address on the site.

When we're talking about doing more work,
what I'm really saying is that we often need
to increase the ***throughput***
of a site.
Throughput is a measure of work over time.
By increasing throughput,
a site can serve more users concurrently.

A very natural throughput measure
on a Django site is *requests per second*.
A page view on a site could contain multiple requests,
so requests per second isn't a perfect analog
to how many users your site can handle,
but it's still a useful measure
to help you reason about site performance.

On the flip side of doing more work,
what does it mean to do less work
to improve performance?

> The fastest code is no code.

Every line of code that you write must be processed
by a computer when it runs.
If your code is inefficient
or if too much is running,
that will naturally mean
that it will take longer to produce a final result.

The time from when an input happens
to when an output is received is called ***latency***.
If a user clicks on a link
on your site,
how long does it take for them
to get a response?
That time delay is latency.

Less work doesn't just mean
that you're running too much code!
There are a lot of factors
that might contribute
to latency,
some of them are easier to optimize than others.

* Inefficient code - mistakes in development can make a computer slower than necessary
* Data size - sending more data requires more effort to deliver to users
* Geographic location - the speed of light is a real limit on network communication
* and more!

If you can reduce latency
on your site,
you can improve the experience
of the people using the site.

{{< web >}}
In the rest of this article,
{{< /web >}}
you'll learn how you can do both more and less work
to make a better site
that will benefit your users.

## Measure First

Before optimizing,
we have to recognize what kind of work
is impacting an app.
In other words,
*what is the resource constraint
that is preventing an app
from performing better?*

Measuring applications,
especially those that are running
with live traffic,
can be a tricky endeavor.
I think we can look at an app
from a zoomed out macro level
or a zoomed in point of view.

I would start my analysis
from inspecting the system overall
for patterns.
Broadly,
you will find that performance tends
to fall into a couple of major bottleneck categories:

* I/O bound
* CPU bound

*I/O bound* means that the system is limited
(that's the "bound" part)
by the inputs and outputs
of the system.
Since that's still a really vague statement,
let's make it more concrete.
An I/O bound system is one
that is waiting
for work to be available.
Classic examples include:

* waiting for responses from a database
* waiting for content from a file system
* waiting for data to transfer over a network
* and so on

Optimizing an I/O bound system is all about minimizing those waiting moments.

Conversely,
*CPU bound* systems are systems
that are drowning in immediate work
to calculate.
The computer's **C**entral **P**rocessing **U**nit can't keep up
with all that it's being asked to do.
Classic examples of CPU bound work are:

* Data science computations for machine learning
* Image processing and rendering
* Test suite execution

Optimizing a CPU bound system focuses heavily
on making calculations faster and cheaper.

Since we understand
that an application
that is underperforming
is likely to be I/O bound or CPU bound,
we can start to look
for these patterns
within the system.
The easiest initial signal to observe is the CPU load.
If the processors
on your production machines
are running at very high CPU utilization,
then it's a pretty clear indicator
that your app is CPU bound.
In my estimation,
you'll rarely see this
for web applications.
**Most underperforming web applications are likely to be I/O bound.**

The reason that web apps are often I/O bound has to do
with their typical function.
Most apps are fetching data from a database
and displaying it to a user.
There isn't a massive amount of computation
(comparatively to something like machine learning)
that the app needs to do.
Thus,
your app is probably waiting around
for data
from the database.

If you observe that the system is not CPU bound,
then the next action is to dig deeper
and find where the application is spending its time waiting.
But how can we do this?
Philosophically,
you should now have an ok understanding
of what to be looking for,
but what tools can you use to accomplish the task
of measurement?

We need to rewind a bit.
A moment ago,
I also made an assumption
that you know how to find the CPU load
of your application.
That may not be the case.
Let's look at some tools
that help you categorize
where your app's resource bottleneck is.

The easiest way to monitor basic resource information
about your app
including CPU, memory, disk usage, and more
may come from your hosting vendor.
My preferred hosting vendor, Heroku, displays all these kinds
of metrics
on a single page
so I can assess system performance at a glance.
Other vendors like Digital Ocean or AWS provide tools
to help you see this information too.

If your hosting vendor doesn't provide these tools,
then you'll have to use other techniques.
Presumably,
if you're using a Virtual Private Server (VPS)
for hosting,
you have access to the server itself via ssh.
On the server that's running your application,
you can use a program like `top`.
This is a classic program
for checking which processes are using the "top" amount
of resources.
`top` will show the list of processes
ordered by what is consuming the most CPU
and will refresh the order of the list every second
to provide a current snapshot in time.
(**Tip**: use `q` to quit `top` after you start it.)

While `top` is useful and gets the job done to learn about CPU usage,
it's not exactly the friendliest tool out there.
There are alternatives to `top`
that may offer a better user experience.
I personally find `top` sufficient,
but I know `htop` is a popular alternative.

If you don't have tools
from your hosting provider
and don't want to use ssh to log into a server,
there are other options to consider.
Broadly,
this other category of tools is called Application Performance Monitoring (APM).
APM tools are vendors
that will monitor your application (go figure!)
if you install the tool along with your app.
These tools help show *both* CPU problems
and I/O issues.
Application performance is very important to businesses,
so the software industry is full of vendors to choose from
with a wide range of features.

To see what these tools can be like for free,
you might want to check out
[Datadog](https://www.datadoghq.com/)
which has a free tier
(Datadog is not a sponsor,
I've just used their service,
enjoyed it,
and know that it's free
for a small number of servers).
Other popular vendors include
[Scout APM](https://scoutapm.com/) and
[New Relic](https://newrelic.com/).

Finally,
we've reached a point where you can diagnose the performance constraints
on your application using a wide variety
of tools or services.
Let's see how to fix problems you may be experiencing!

## Do More

We can address throughput and do more
by tuning a few different knobs.

When thinking about doing more,
try to think about the system
in two different scaling dimensions:

* Horizontally
* Vertically

Horizontal and vertical scaling are methods
of describing *how* to do more
in software systems.

Let's relate this to a silly example
to give you a good intuitive feel for scaling.
Imagine that you need to move large bags
of dirt
(approximately 40 lbs / 18 kg per bag)
to plant a huge garden.
The job is to unload the hundreds of bags
from a delivery truck
to your imaginary back yard.
You enlist the help
of your friends
to get the job done.

One strategy is to get your *strongest* friends to help.
Maybe there aren't as many of them,
but their strength can make quick work
of moving the bags.
This is *vertical scaling*.
The additional power of your friends allows them
to move the bags more easily
than someone with an average or weaker build.

Another strategy is to get *lots* of friends to help.
Maybe these friends can't move as many bags
as the stronger ones,
but many hands make light work.
This is *horizontal scaling*.
The increased number of people allows the group
to move more bags
because more individuals can do the work simultaneously.

We can apply this same thinking to computer systems.

### Vertical Scaling

To achieve vertical scaling,
you would run your application on a more powerful computer.
Cloud vendors give you all kinds of tools
to do this.
Picking a faster computer is naturally going to cost you more,
so vendors make many options available
(check out
[this page from AWS](https://aws.amazon.com/ec2/instance-types/)
to see the dizzying array of options).

When should you think about vertical scaling?
One natural case is when your application is CPU bound.
If the processor is struggling
to process the requests from an application,
a faster processor may help.
With a higher clock speed from a faster individual CPU,
a computer will be able to process an individual request faster.

Moving to a larger computer is typically considered vertical scaling,
but it may be possible to have horizontal effects
by moving to a larger computer
because of how modern computers are designed.
These days,
larger computers typically come
with a higher number of CPUs.
Each individual CPU may be faster
than a smaller computer configuration
*and* there will be more CPUs
on the single machine.
Because of this characteristic,
you will likely need to change your application configuration
to take advantage of the additional power
supplied by the extra CPU cores.
While the traditional definition of vertical scaling
(i.e., a faster individual CPU can do work quicker than a slower one) still applies,
the line between vertical and horizontal scaling is somewhat blurred
because of the multi-CPU core paradigm
of modern CPUs.

{{< web >}}
In the Understand Django deployment article,
{{< /web >}}
we discussed Gunicorn's `--workers` flag.
Recall that Python application servers
like Gunicorn work
by creating a main process
and a set of worker processes.
The main process will distribute incoming network connections
to the worker processes to handle the actual traffic
on your website.
If you vertically scale the server machine
from a size that has 1 CPU
to a machine that has 2, 4, or more CPUs,
and you don't change the number of workers,
then you'll waste available CPU capacity
and won't see most of the benefits
from the upgrade in server size.

If modern vertical scaling uses more CPUs
when moving to a bigger machine,
then what is horizontal scaling?
The difference is primarily in the number
of computers needed
to do the scaling.
Vertical scaling changes a single machine
to achieve more throughput.
Horizontal scaling pulls multiple machines
into the equation.

### Horizontal Scaling

Conceptually,
how does horizontal scaling work?
With the vertical scaling model,
you can see a clear connection
between users making a request
to your website's domain
and a single machine handling those requests
(i.e., the main process from your application server
distributes requests).
With the horizontal model,
we're now discussing multiple computers.
How does a single domain name handle routing
to multiple computers?
With more computers!

Like the main process
that distributes requests,
we need a central hub
that is able to route traffic
to the different machines
in your horizontally scaled system.
This hub is usually called a **load balancer**.
A load balancer can be used
for multiple things.
I see load balancers used primarily to:

* route traffic to the different application servers
  in a system
* handle the TLS certificate management that makes HTTPS possible

Since the load balancer doesn't do most
of the actual work
of processing a request,
your system can increase its throughput
by increasing the number
of application servers.
In this setup,
each application server "thinks"
that it is the main server that's handling requests.
The load balancer behaves like a client
that's making requests on behalf
of the actual user.
This kind of configuration is called a proxy setup.

If you want to learn more about horizontal scaling
with a load balancer,
then I suggest you check out
[Nginx](https://www.nginx.com/) (pronounced "engine X"),
[HAProxy](http://www.haproxy.org/)
(which stands for "high availability proxy"),
or [AWS ALBs](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/elasticloadbalancing/latest/application/introduction.html)
(for "application load balancer").
These tools are commonly used
and have a reputation for being strong load balancers.

### What's Better?

*What are the tradeoffs between horizontal scaling and vertical scaling?*

When you add more pieces to a system,
you're increasing the complexity of the system.
Thus,
vertical scaling can, at least initially, produce a design
with lower operational complexity.
Personally,
if I ran a service
on some VPS like Digital Ocean or AWS,
I would probably reach for vertical scaling first.
A bigger machine would allow me to use a higher number
of concurrent worker processes
to increase throughput,
and I would avoid the complexity
of deploying multiple application servers.

In reality,
I run my side projects on a Platform as a Service, Heroku.
With my choice of Heroku,
the service already includes a load balancer by default.
This means that I can trivially scale horizontally
by changing a setting in Heroku
that will start multiple application servers.

While vertical scaling may be a good fit
if you don't have an existing load balancer,
that scaling path does have downsides to consider.

First,
in a vertically scaled world,
downtime on your server could mean downtime
*for your service*.
Whether a site is reachable or not reachable is called "availability"
by the software industry.
If your entire site is tied to a large vertically scaled server,
then it can act as a single point of failure
if there is a problem.

Secondly,
a vertically scaled service may potentially have more cost
for you.
In my experience,
most websites have high and low periods
of usage throughout the day.
For instance,
my current employer is a US healthcare company
that provides telemedicine visits
for people that need to speak
with a doctor virtually.
When it's the middle of the night
in the US,
the site utilization is naturally lower
as most people are sleeping.

One common cost optimization is to use fewer computing resources
during periods of lower utilization.
On a vertically scaled service,
it is harder to change computer sizes quickly.
Thus,
that computing resource's usage is relatively fixed,
even if no one is using your service.
In contrast,
a horizontally scaled service can be configured
to use "auto-scaling."

Auto-scaling is the idea
that the infrastructure can be resized dynamically,
depending on the use of the site.
During periods of high activity,
more computers can be added automatically
to join the load balancer distribution
and handle additional load.
When activity dies down,
these extra machines can be removed from use.
This cost saving technique helps ensure
that your system is only using what it needs.

The truth is that if your system reaches a large enough size and scale,
then picking horizontal or vertical scaling is a false choice.
As a system matures and grows,
you may need to have a mix of the two scaling types,
so that your service has the characteristics
that you need
(like availability).

I hope that I've helped equip you
with some mental modeling tools.
With these tools,
you should have some idea of how to handle more traffic
{{< web >}}
when your site becomes wildly popular. 😄
{{< /web >}}

In this section,
we focused on increasing throughput
by changing your service's infrastructure
to handle more load.
Now let's shift from the macro point of view
to the micro view
and talk about how to improve throughput
by doing less.

## Do Less

*How do you make your Django site do less work?*
We should always measure,
but since I believe most websites are I/O bound,
let's focus on techniques
to improve in that dimension.

### Optimizing Database Queries

The most common performance problem
that I've encountered
with Django applications
is the N+1 query bug
(some people will describe it as the 1+N query bug
for reasons that may become evident in a moment).

The N+1 bug occurs when your application code calls the database
in a loop.
How many queries are in this made up example?

```python
from application.models import Movie

movies = Movie.objects.all()
for movie in movies:
    print(movie.director.name)
```

It's a bit of a trick question because
you might have a custom manager (i.e., `objects`),
but,
in the simplest scenario,
there is one query to fetch the movies,
and one query for each director.

The reason for this behavior is that Django does a lazy evaluation
of the movies `QuerySet`.
The ORM is not aware
that it needs to do a join on the movie and director tables
to fetch all the data.
The first query on the movie table occurs
when the iteration happens
in the Python `for` loop.
When the `print` function tries to access the `director` foreign key,
the ORM does not have the director information cached
in Python memory
for the query set.
Django must then fetch the director data
in another database query
to display the director's name.

This adds up to:

* 1 query for the movies table
* N queries on the director table for each iteration through the `for` loop

Hence the name, "N+1" query bug.

The reason that this is so bad is because calling the database is way slower
than accessing data in Python memory.
Also, this problem gets worse
if there are more rows to iterate over
(i.e., more movies to process and, thus, more directors to fetch individually).

The way to fix this issue is to hint to Django
that the code is going to access data
from the deeper relationship.
We can do that by hinting to the ORM
with `select_related`.
Let's see the previous example with this change.

```python
from application.models import Movie

movies = Movie.objects.select_related(
    "director").all()
for movie in movies:
    print(movie.director.name)
```

In the reworked example,
the ORM will "know" that it must fetch the director data.
Because of this extra information,
the framework will fetch from both the movie and director tables
*in a single query*
when the `for` loop iteration starts.

Under the hood,
Django performs a more complex `SELECT` query
that includes a join
on the two tables.
The database sends back all the data at once
and Django caches the data
in Python memory.
Now,
when execution reaches the `print` line,
the `director.name` attribute can pull from memory
instead of needing to trigger another database query.

The performance savings here can be massive,
especially if your code works with a lot of database rows
at once.

While `select_related` is fantastic,
it doesn't work for all scenarios.
Other types of relationships
like a many to many relationship can't be fetched
in a single query.
For those scenarios,
you can reach for `prefetch_related`.
With this method,
Django will issue a smaller number of queries
(usually 1 per table)
and blend the results together in memory.
In practice,
`prefetch_related` operates very much like `select_related`
in most circumstances.
Check out the Django docs to understand more.

### Caching Expensive Work

If you know:

* execution will likely happen many times
* is expensive to create, AND
* won't need to change

then you're looking at work
that is a very good candidate to cache.
With caching,
Django can save the results
of some expensive operation
into a very fast caching tool
and restore those results later.

A good example of this might be a news site.
A news site is very "read heavy,"
that is,
users are more likely to use the site
for viewing information
than for writing and saving information
to the site.
A news site is also a good example
because users will read the same article,
and the content of that article is fixed in form.

Django includes tools to make it simple
to work with the cache
to optimize content like our news site example.

The simplest of these tools is the `cache_page` decorator.
This decorator can cache the results
of an entire Django view
for a period of time.
When a page doesn't have any personalization,
this can be a quick and effective way
to serve HTML results
from a view.
You can find this decorator
in `django.views.decorators.cache`.

You may need a lower level of granularity
than a whole page.
For instance,
your site might have some kind of logged in user
and a customized navigation bar
with a profile picture or something similar.
In that scenario,
you can't really cache the whole page
and serve that to multiple users,
because other users would see the customized navigation bar
of the first user who made the request.
If this is the kind of situation you're in,
then the `cache` template tag may be the best tool for you.

Here's a template example of the `cache` tag in use.

{{< web >}}
```django
{% load cache %}

Hi {{ user.username }}, this part won't be cached.

{% cache 600 my_cache_key_name %}
    Everything inside of here will be cached.
    The first argument to `cache` is how long this should be cached
    in seconds. This cache fragment will cache for 10 minutes.
    Cached chunks need a key name to help the cache system
    find the right cache chunk.

    This cache example usage is a bit silly because this is static text
    and there is no expensive computation in this chunk.
{% endcache %}
```
{{< /web >}}

With this scheme,
any expensive computation
that your template does will be cached.
*Be careful with this tag!*
The tag is useful if computation happens during rendering,
but if you're doing the evaluation and fetching *inside
of your view*
instead of at template rendering time,
then you're unlikely to get the benefits that you want.

Finally,
there is the option to use the cache interface directly.
Here's the basic usage pattern:

```python
# application/views.py
from django.core.cache import cache

from application.complex import calculate_expensive_thing

def some_view(request):
    expensive_result = cache.get(
        "expensive_computation")
    if expensive_result is None:
        expensive_result = calculate_expensive_thing()
        cache.set(
            "expensive_computation",
            expensive_result
        )

    # Handle the rest of the view.
    ...
```

On the first request to this view,
the `expensive_result` won't be in the cache,
so the view will calculate the result
and save it to the cache.
On subsequent requests,
the expensive result can be pulled
from the cache.
In this example,
I'm using the default timeout
for the cache,
but you can control the timeout values
when you need more control.
The cache system has plenty
of other cool features,
so check it out in the docs.

As fair warning,
caching often requires more tools and configuration.
Django works with very popular cache tools
like Redis and Memcached,
but you'll have to configure one of the tools
on your own.
The Django documentation will help you,
but be prepared for more work on your part.

Database optimization and caching are go-to techniques
for optimization.
When you're optimizing,
how do you know that you're doing it right?
What gains are you getting?
Let's look at some tools next
that will let you answer those questions.

## Tools To Measure Change

We'll look at tools at an increasing level of complexity.
This first tool is one
that is massively useful
while developing in Django.
The other tools are more general purpose tools,
but they still are worth knowing about,
so that you'll know when to reach for them.

Each of these tools helps you get real performance data.
By measuring the before and after
of your changes,
you can learn if the changes are actually producing the gains
that you expect or hope to achieve.

### Django Debug Toolbar

The
[Django Debug Toolbar](https://django-debug-toolbar.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html)
is a critical tool
that I add to my projects.
The toolbar acts as an overlay
on your site
that opens to give you a tray
of different categories
of diagnostic information
about your views.

Each category of information is grouped
into a "panel,"
and you can select between the different panels
to dig up information
that will assist you while doing optimization work.

You'll find panels like:

* SQL
* Templates
* Request
* Time

The SQL panel is where I spend nearly all
of my time when optimizing.
This panel will display all the queries
that a page requests.
For each query,
you can find what code triggered the database query
and you even get the exact SQL `SELECT`.
You can also get an `EXPLAIN` about a query
if you really need the gory details
of what the database is doing.

With a little bit of eye training,
you'll learn to spot N+1 query bugs
because you can see certain queries repeated over and over
and "cascading" like a waterfall.

I'll often test with the debug toolbar
when I'm trying to sprinkle in `select_related`
to visually confirm
that I've reduced the query count on a page.
The debug toolbar is open source
and is a great free resource.
The toolbar is totally worth the investment
of configuring it
for your next Django project.

### hey / ab

There are two tools
that are very similar
that I use when I need to get a crude measure
of the performance of a site.
These tools are
[hey](https://github.com/rakyll/hey)
and
[ab](https://httpd.apache.org/docs/2.4/programs/ab.html)
(Apache Bench).
Both of these tools are *load generators*
that are meant to benchmark a site's basic performance characteristics.

In practice,
I prefer `hey`,
but I mention `ab`
because it is a well known tool in this space
that you are likely to encounter
if you research this load generator topic.

Operating this kind of tool is trivial:

```bash
$ hey https://www.example.com
```

In this example,
hey will try to open up a large number
of concurrent connections
to the URL
and make a bunch of requests.
When the tool is done,
it will report how many
of the requests were successful
and some related timing information
and statistics.
Using a load generator like this lets you synthesize traffic
to learn how your site is going to perform.

I'd suggest you be careful
where you tell these tools to operate.
If you're not careful,
*you could cause a Denial of Service attack
on your own machines.*
The flood of requests might make your site unavailable
to other users
by consuming all your server's resources.
Think twice before pointing this at your live site!

### Locust

The previous load generator tools
that I mentioned act as somewhat crude measurements
because you're limited
to testing a single URL
at a time.
What should you do if you need to simulate traffic
that matches real user usage patterns?
Enter
[Locust](https://locust.io/).
Locust is not a tool that I would reach for casually,
but it is super cool and worth knowing about.

The goal of Locust is to do load testing
on your site
in a realistic way.
This means that it's your job to model the expected behavior
of your users
in a machine understandable way.
If you know your users well
(and I hope you do),
then you can imagine the flows
that they might follow
when using your site.

In Locust,
you codify the behavior patterns
that you care about,
then run Locust
to simulate a large number of users
that will act like you expect
(with randomness to boot
to really make the test like reality).

Advanced load testing is something you may never need
for your site,
but it's pretty cool to know
that Python has you covered
if you need to understand performance
and the limits
of your site
at that deep level.

### Application Performance Monitoring (APM)

{{< web >}}
Earlier in this article,
{{< /web >}}
I mentioned that Application Performance Monitoring tools
can show you CPU and memory utilization
of your site.
That's usually just the tip of the iceberg.

An APM tool often goes far beyond hardware resource measurement.
I like to think
of APMs
as a supercharged version
of the debug toolbar.

First, an APM is used on live sites typically.
The tool will collect data about real requests.
This lets you learn about the *real* performance problems
on the site
that affect *real* users.

For instance,
New Relic will collect data
on slow requests into "traces."
These traces are aggregated
into a set to show you which pages
on your site
are the worst performers.
You can drill into that list,
view an individual trace,
and investigate the problem.

Maybe you've got an N+1 bug.
Maybe one of your database tables is missing an index
on an important field,
and the database is scanning too many records
during `SELECT` statements.
These traces (or whatever they are called in other services) help you prioritize
what to fix.

In fact,
an APM highlights the true value of measurement.
If I can leave you with a parting thought about optimization,
think about this:
***optimize where it counts***.

Here's a simple thought experiment to illustrate what I mean.
You have an idealized system that does two things repeatedly:

* One task (A) is 90% of all activity on the site.
* The other task (B) is the remaining 10%.

If you have to pick a target to try to optimize
because your system performance is inadequate,
which one do you pick?

Let's assume that you know an optimization for each type of task
that could cause the task to execute in 50% of the time.
If implementing each optimization is the same level of effort,
then there is a clear winner as to which task you should optimize.
You could either:

* Optimize A for 90% * 50% for a total system saving of 45%.
* Optimize B for 10% * 50% for a total system saving of 5%.

In most circumstances,
spend your optimization effort
on the area that will have outsized impact
(i.e., pick task A as much as you can).
Sometimes the hard part is figuring out which task is A
and which task is B.
Monitoring tools like an APM can help you see
where the worst offenders are
so you can focus your limited time in the right spot.

## Summary

{{< web >}}
In this article,
{{< /web >}}
we looked into making Django apps go fast.
We saw:

* A mental model for thinking about performance optimization
* Different types of performance bottlenecks
* How to get your system to do more by either horizontal or vertical scaling
* How to get your app to do less work
    by optimizing database queries and caching
* Tools to aid you in all of this optimization work

{{< web >}}
In the next article,
{{< /web >}}
we'll look into security.
You'll learn about:

* How Django helps you be more secure with some of its design features
* What those different warnings from `./manage.py check --deploy` mean
* Fundamental things you should consider to help keep your site secure

{{< web >}}
If you have questions,
you can reach me online
on X
where I am
[@mblayman](https://x.com/mblayman).
{{< /web >}}
&nbsp;
